BACKGROUND: There is limited data regarding sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB)
after neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) for cN3b patients, who present with both
axillary and ipsilateral internal mammary node involvement. We examined trends
in the use of SLNB in cN3b patients and survival by axillary procedure for those
with nodal pathologic complete response (nPCR).
METHODS: Adult women with nonmetastatic cN3b invasive breast carcinoma between
2012 and 2021 were selected from the National Cancer Database. These patients
were compared based on type of axillary surgery, specifically SLNB, SLNB with
axillary lymph node dissection (ALND), and ALND alone. Kaplan-Meier analysis was
used to compare overall survival.
RESULTS: A total of 4,236 patients were included. In 2012, 8.5% of these
patients underwent SLNB alone and 18.3% underwent SLNB+ALND. In 2021, this
increased to 35.1% for SLNB alone and 23.0% for SLNB with subsequent ALND (p <
0.0001). For patients who received NAC, the rate of nPCR was overall found to be
24.9%. Overall survival of patients receiving SLNB or SLNB+ALND with nPCR was
not statistically significantly different from the ALND only group with nPCR (p
= 0.22 and 0.57, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: There has been increasing use of the SLNB procedure for patients
with cN3b breast cancer over the past decade. In patients with nPCR, SLNB was
not associated with reduced survival. For well-selected cN3b patients with an
excellent clinical response to NAC, including nPCR, axillary de-escalation
strategies, such as SLNB with omission of completion axillary dissection, may be
considered.
BACKGROUND: Diffuse gastric and lobular breast cancer (LBC) syndrome is an
autosomal-dominant syndrome characterised by early-onset diffuse gastric cancer
and LBC most often caused by germline pathogenic variants (PVs) in CDH1. We
previously showed the International Gastric Cancer Linkage Consortium (IGCLC)
criteria for genetic testing to have poor sensitivity for CDH1 PV and proposed
our own simpler and more sensitive Yale criteria. The European Reference Network
on Genetic Tumour Risk Syndromes subsequently proposed expanding the IGCLC
criteria and showed its LBC-expanded criteria to be more sensitive than the
IGCLC criteria in a European cohort of CDH1 PV carriers.
METHODS: We aggregated demographic and clinical data of all CDH1 PV carriers
identified at three US commercial laboratories. These data were used to
calculate the sensitivity of the IGCLC, LBC-expanded and National Comprehensive
Cancer Network (NCCN)/Yale criteria.
RESULTS: Data on 708 probands and their 4318 family members were included in the
analysis. In this cohort, the sensitivities for detecting CDH1 PVs were 23.6%
for IGCLC criteria, 35.7% for LBC-expanded criteria and 82.2% for NCCN/Yale
criteria.
CONCLUSION: In a large cohort of CDH1 PV carriers to date, the IGCLC and
LBC-expanded criteria called for genetic testing in a minority of CDH1 PV
carriers while the Yale criteria detected the large majority. Along with their
superior sensitivity, the NCCN/Yale criteria address critical practical
challenges in cancer genetics by not depending heavily on pathology information
from family members which is often lacking and by incorporating recommendations
from other cancer genetics guidelines.
BACKGROUND: Glioblastoma is a highly aggressive primary central nervous system
tumor characterized by poor outcomes. In case of relapse or progression to
adjuvant chemotherapy, there is no univocal preferred regimen for relapsing
glioblastoma.
METHODS: We conducted a systematic review and Bayesian trial-level network
meta-analyses (NMA) to identify the regimens associated with the best outcomes.
The primary endpoint was overall survival (OS). Secondary endpoints were
progression-free survival (PFS) and overall response rates (ORR). We estimated
separate treatment rankings based on the surface under the cumulative ranking
curve values. Only phase II/III prospective comparative trials were included.
RESULTS: Twenty-four studies (3733 patients and 27 different therapies) were
ultimately included. Twenty-three different regimens were compared for OS, 21
for PFS, and 26 for ORR. When taking lomustine as a common comparator, only
regorafenib was likely to be significantly superior in terms of OS (hazard
ratio: 0.50, 95% credible interval: 0.33-0.75). Regorafenib was significantly
superior to other 16 (69.6%) regimens, including NovoTTF-100A, bevacizumab
monotherapy, and several bevacizumab-based combinations. Regarding PFS and ORR,
no treatment was clearly superior to the others.
CONCLUSIONS: This NMA supports regorafenib as one of the best available options
for relapsing/refractory glioblastoma. Lomustine, NovoTTF-100A, and bevacizumab
emerge as other viable alternative regimens. However, evidence on regorafenib is
controversial at best. Moreover, most studies were underpowered, with varying
inclusion criteria and primary endpoints, and no longer adapted to the most
recent glioblastoma classification. A paradigmatic change in clinical trials'
design for relapsing/refractory glioblastoma and more effective treatments are
urgently required.
BACKGROUND: Taxane-based chemotherapy is the primary treatment for
triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), yet clinical outcomes remain
unsatisfactory due to the persistence of chemoresistance. Identifying key
factors that contribute to chemoresistance and understanding the associated
molecular mechanisms is therefore essential.
METHOD: The GEO databases were utilized to pinpoint factors related to
chemoresistance, which were subsequently validated using clinical tissue
samples. The role of UGCG in the malignant progression and chemoresistance of
TNBC was assessed through various functional assays. Western blotting, qRT-PCR,
and immunohistochemistry were employed to investigate the signaling pathways
associated with UGCG in TNBC.
RESULTS: UGCG expression was notably elevated in chemoresistant breast cancer
tissues and cells, as identified in GEO databases and confirmed through
immunohistochemistry. Additionally, findings from our cohorts indicated that
higher levels of UGCG expression correlated with a lower rate of pathological
complete response (pCR), suggesting it could serve as an independent predictor
of chemotherapy effectiveness. Gain- and loss-of-function experiments
demonstrated that UGCG enhanced the proliferation, metastasis, and stemness of
breast cancer cells. Furthermore, treatment with paclitaxel or docetaxel
resulted in increased UGCG expression, which in turn reduced
chemotherapy-induced cell apoptosis and improved drug resistance and metastatic
capabilities. Mechanistically, UGCG was found to amplify the activation of NF-κB
and Wnt/β-catenin pathways, and the use of inhibitors targeting these pathways
diminished the UGCG-induced malignant effects.
CONCLUSION: Our findings underscore the significant role of UGCG in the
chemoresistance and progression of breast cancer, suggesting it as a predictive
biomarker and potential therapeutic target to combat chemoresistance in this
disease.
BACKGROUND: Lung metastasis is a critical and often fatal progression in cancer
patients, with monocyte-derived macrophages (Mo-macs) playing multifaceted roles
in this process. Despite the recognized importance of Mac-macs, most studies
focus on these cells themselves, while the precise mechanisms through which
tumor cells manipulate Mo-macs to promote metastasis remain poorly understood.
METHODS: We developed an in vivo CRISPR screening system to identify genes
involved in macrophage-dependent metastasis by depleting Mo-macs.
Osteoprotegerin (OPG) was identified as the factor significantly enhances lung
metastasis. We validated its function in lung metastasis by modulating the
expression of OPG in an array of cell lines and performed spontaneous and
experimental lung metastasis assays. Genetically engineered mice were utilized
to confirm the role of RANKL-RANK signaling in OPG-mediated metastasis.
Additionally, we employed different neutralizing antibodies to elucidate the
roles of Mo-macs and NK cells and inhibitor to clarify the role of CXCL10
signaling.
FINDINGS: Employing in vivo screening techniques, we elucidate the role of OPG,
a protein secreted by cancer cells, in driving lung metastasis, contingent upon
regulating Mo-mac activity. OPG blocks the signaling cascade between receptor
activator of nuclear factor kappa-B ligand (RANKL) and its receptor RANK on
Mo-macs, thereby hindering Mo-macs from secreting CXCL10, a chemokine crucial
for recruiting natural killer (NK) cells that help control lung metastasis.
Moreover, we observe an enrichment of OPG amplifications in metastatic cancer
patients, and elevated levels of OPG expression in lung metastatic sites
compared to paired primary breast cancer samples.
INTERPRETATION: Our work revealed that OPG works as a lung metastasis promoting
factor by blocking the RANKL-RANK-CXCL10 axis to drive the paucity of NK cells,
which could be a therapeutic target for lung metastatic cancer patients.
FUNDING: The full list of funding supporting this study can be found in the
Acknowledgements section.
BACKGROUND: There is conflicting evidence regarding whether postoperative
complications after breast cancer surgery are associated with worse oncological
outcome. This study aimed to assess the risk of systemic breast cancer
recurrence after surgical site infection and also the impact of surgical site
infection on locoregional recurrence, breast cancer-specific survival and
overall survival.
METHODS: This nationwide cohort study included patients who underwent surgery
for primary breast cancer in Sweden between January 2008 and September 2019. The
study cohort was identified in the Breast Cancer Database Sweden 3.0, a database
linking the National Breast Cancer Quality Register to national population-based
healthcare registers held by the National Board of Health and Welfare and
Statistics Sweden. The primary exposure was surgical site infection within 90
days from surgery, and the primary outcome was systemic recurrence of breast
cancer. Secondary outcomes included locoregional recurrence, overall survival
and breast cancer-specific survival. Multivariable Cox regression analysis was
performed to assess the association between exposure, predictors and outcomes.
RESULTS: Of 82 102 patients included in the study, 15.7% experienced a surgical
site infection within 90 days of surgery. Surgical site infection was not
significantly associated with systemic recurrence, locoregional recurrence or
breast cancer-specific survival after adjustment for confounding variables.
Surgical site infection was significantly associated with worse overall
survival, but the significant association disappeared in a sensitivity analysis
excluding all patients with any kind of malignancy before breast cancer
diagnosis.
CONCLUSION: Surgical site infection after breast cancer surgery does not
significantly increase the risk of systemic recurrence. All possible actions
should nevertheless be taken to reduce complication rates.
BACKGROUND: The prognostic role of preoperative carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA)
in breast cancer is recognized, but the impact of postoperative CEA levels on
survival in early breast cancer is uncertain.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We conducted a retrospective study of 921
non-metastatic breast cancer patients treated at anonymized. Patients were
categorized as normal (CEA ≤3 µg/L) or elevated (CEA >3 µg/L).
RESULTS: Elevated postoperative CEA levels were associated with shorter
disease-free survival (DFS) (median, 174.6 vs. 239.8 months; hazard ratio (HR):
1.80; 95% confidence interval (CI): 1.27-2.56; p < 0.001) and overall survival
(OS) (median, 174.6 vs. 261.1 months; HR:2.34; 95% CI: 1.59-3.45; p < 0.001).
Elevated CEA was associated with shorter DFS (median, 174.6 months vs. not
reached (NR); HR:2.30; 95% CI: 1.03-5.19; p = 0.043) and OS (NR vs. NR; HR:
2.81; 95% CI: 1.06-7.48; p = 0.039) in stage 1, shorter DFS (median, 239. 8 vs.
141.1 months; HR: 1.95; 95% CI: 1.28-2.98; p = 0.002) and OS (median, 169 vs.
261.1 months; HR: 2.56; 95% CI: 1.6-4.12; p < 0.001) in stage 2 and shorter OS
(median, 65 vs. 183.1 months; HR: 3.25; 95% CI: 1.19-8.83; p = 0.021) in stage
3.
CONCLUSIONS: Elevated postoperative CEA indicates worse DFS and OS in patients
with HR-positive/HER2-negative early breast cancer.
BACKGROUND: Disparities in public assistance or the urbanization level of a
residential region can affect cancer treatment outcomes. This study aimed to
investigate whether these factors affect the overall survival (OS) of patients
with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation-positive non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) using Tokushukai REAL World Data.
METHODS: We analyzed the clinical data of consecutive patients with NSCLC
receiving EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors between April 2010 and March 2020 at
46 Tokushukai Medical Group hospitals in Japan. The patient's insurance coverage
status was extracted from electronic medical records, and the urbanization level
of residential regions was classified as megalopolis or other according to the
secondary medical region. Univariate and multivariate Cox regression analyses
were performed to examine the associations between OS and
patient/tumor/treatment/socioeconomic-related factors.
RESULTS: In total, 758 patients (58.5% females) were included in the study; 41
patients (5.4%) received public assistance, and 442 patients (58.3%) were
categorized under megalopolis in the secondary medical regions. In multivariate
Cox regression analyses, there was no significant difference in the OS between
non-recipients of public assistance and recipients [hazard ratio (HR) 1.084; 95%
confidence intervals (CIs), 0.674-1.744]. There was also no significant
difference in the OS between megalopolis and other regions in the secondary
medical regions (HR 1.143; 95% CIs, 0.914-1.428).
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that neither the use of public assistance nor
the urbanization level in the residential region significantly impacts the
prognosis of Japanese patients with EGFR mutation-positive NSCLC.
BACKGROUND: Poly ADP ribose polymerase (PARP) inhibitors, such as Olaparib
(Lynparza®), are pivotal in treating certain cancers, particularly those linked
to BReast CAncer gene (BRCA) mutations. Despite its established efficacy,
Olaparib use is associated with various adverse events (AEs), notably
haematologic toxicities, such as anaemia. This retrospective chart review study
aimed to examine haematologic outcomes and associated factors in patients
treated with Olaparib at a tertiary hospital in the UAE.
METHODS: We reviewed the medical charts of patients prescribed Olaparib and
focused on haematologic indices at a baseline of 1-month, 3-month and 6-month
follow-up periods. Data were analysed to determine the AEs frequency,
transfusions need and potential associated patients' clinical characteristics.
RESULTS: This study included all patients who received Olaparib (n = 66). Most
patients were females (n = 61; 92.4%) and the vast majority were non-smokers
(97%) and free of hepatic disease. Themean age of the patients was
57.03-year-old (SD) = 12.06 years), and body mass index (BMI) was 28.16 (SD =
6.40) kg/m2. A high rate of anaemia (70.8%) was detected among the patients
during their Olaparib therapy. Approximately, one-third of the patients
developed neutropenia and thrombocytopenia. Transfusion was needed in almost
half of the patients. Glomerular filtration rate (GFR) and neutropenia were
significantly correlated with moderate-severe anaemia (OR = 0.097, 95% CI:
0.011-0.88, p value = .038) and (OR = 9.04, 95% CI: 1.024-79.78, p
value = .048), respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings highlight the side effects of Olaparib therapy in
terms of haematology which could be avoided. Further studies are needed to
better understand the therapeutic management of Olaparib and the mitigation of
haematologic complications.
BACKGROUND: In Canada, after completing their treatment at oncology centers in
tertiary care facilities, most breast cancer patients are discharged and receive
survivorship care from primary care providers (PCPs). Evidence-based guidelines
exist to inform appropriate care for breast cancer survivor follow-up.
OBJECTIVES: This study analyzed the concordance of breast cancer survivorship
follow-up care by PCPs with recommended guidelines at an academic Family Health
Team (FHT) in Ottawa.
DESIGN: Retrospective chart review of electronic medical records of rostered
patients from FHT.
METHODS: Data was extracted from the charts of 60 breast cancer survivors.
Concordance of breast cancer survivorship care by PCPs with evidence-based
guidelines was established in three key survivorship domains: surveillance for
recurrence or new cancers, management of treatment side effects and preventative
health.
RESULTS: PCPs provide care concordant with guidelines only 20% of the time, with
areas such as preventative care at 86.7% concordance far better than management
of side effects at 58.3% and oncological surveillance at 38.3%. Care did not
significantly differ by age at diagnosis.
CONCLUSION: These results highlight gaps in the current survivorship care
delivery and function as a baseline for comparative analyses for future
interventions to optimize survivorship follow-up care.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer patients and their informal caregivers often report
unmet psychosocial, relational, and physical health needs. Dyadic interventions
may improve patient and caregiver outcomes, but few have been integrated into
clinical care or designed for Black breast cancer patients and their female
caregivers. We used the Health Equity Implementation Framework to design for
dissemination by identifying facilitators and barriers to implementing a dyadic
survivorship intervention delivered via video teleconferencing (e.g., Zoom).
METHODS: We conducted semi-structured interviews with a purposive sample of 18
collaborators with roles at a comprehensive cancer center and community
organizations to understand facilitators and barriers to implementing a dyadic
intervention for Black breast cancer patients and their caregivers. We used
rapid qualitative analysis (templated summaries synthesized in matrices) to
conduct a directed content analysis. We identified patterns in responses to
interview guide questions and developed cross-cutting themes.
RESULTS: Collaborators' roles fell into four domains: patient-facing mental
health (33%), patient-facing physical health (28%), research/administration
(28%), and cancer-focused community groups (11%). Participants were supportive
of a dyadic intervention for Black women with breast cancer and female
caregivers. Collaborators noted that psychosocial care at the cancer center was
already being delivered via Zoom and saw benefits to including caregivers.
Overarching themes include the need to address gaps in care (for caregivers,
Black women, and long-term breast cancer survivors); the importance of
representation in building trust and mitigating stigma; and the challenges
within the healthcare system around providing care services to dyads.
CONCLUSION: Application of these findings can help address the challenges of
implementing a dyadic survivorship intervention for Black women with breast
cancer and their caregivers in clinical settings. Expanding models such as the
Health Equity Implementation Framework to include caregivers may help focus
dissemination and implementation efforts on both members of a dyad and improve
outcomes for both.
BACKGROUND: Little is known about the existing structure and function of
referral networks in the prevalent referral system for specialized surgical care
in Canada, which is based on direct physician referral to specialists in a
largely unmanaged referral marketplace. Our objective was to describe and
analyze the referral networks of referring physicians and surgeons for common
surgical procedures in Ontario, to better understand potential barriers to
single-entry models.
METHODS: We analyzed referral networks for patients between referring physicians
and surgeons for 9 common scheduled surgical procedures from 2016 to 2019 using
administrative data sources in Ontario. We described the connectedness of
referring physician-surgeon pairs using descriptive measures and graphical
social network analysis.
RESULTS: The median number of surgeons connected to a referring physician for
patients having a particular surgical procedure ranged from 1 (interquartile
range [IQR] 1-3) for spine surgery to 3 (IQR 1-4) for knee arthroplasty and 3
(IQR 2-5) for noncancer uterine procedures. Referral network structure varied
according to the procedure studied. Spine surgery was highly clustered with a
small number of larger groups; gallbladder, inguinal hernia, and noncancer
uterine surgery were highly distributed with many small groups within the
referral network. Breast cancer surgery occurred in a largely distributed
network, but with a skewed distribution reflecting a few small groups with large
numbers of patients.
CONCLUSION: Improving surgical wait times by coordinating surgical referrals
will require approaches that address the structure of existing referral
networks. Most physicians refer their patients to a very small number of
surgeons, suggesting that referring physicians largely do not individualize
referrals to multiple different surgeons based on specific patient
characteristics.
BACKGROUND: Gene polymorphisms of rearranged during transfection (RET) and its
ligand neurturin (NRTN) are one of the focus of studies in the investigation of
cancer pathogenesis, invasion, and metastasis. In this study, we aimed to
examine the possible risk of breast cancer between RET G691S, L769L, S904S, and
NRTN IVSI-663 polymorphisms and to evaluate serum NRTN, brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF), matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2, MMP-9, and focal
adhesion kinase (FAK) levels.
METHODS: The study consists of 110 breast cancer patients and 110 controls.
Polymorphisms were detected by the polymerase chain reaction method from study
groups whole blood.
RESULTS: The NRTN IVSI-663 polymorphism in G allele has been found to be 1.54
fold increased the risk of breast cancer, however AA genotype has been found
0.43 fold decreased the risk of breast cancer (P < .05, P < .05, respectively).
Study groups showed a similar profile for RET G691S, L769L, S904S allele
frequencies and genotype distributions (P > .05). In the patient group,
significant increase in serum NRTN and FAK levels and decrease in MMP-2 and
MMP-9 levels were found (P < .05, P < .05, P < .05, P < .05, respectively).
DISCUSSION: In summary that increased breast cancer risk with the G allele in
NRTN gene IVSI-663 polymorphism, as well as the increased serum NRTN and FAK
levels, will contribute to the diagnosis, prognosis and determination of new
treatment strategies.
BACKGROUND: Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), the most prevalent lung cancer
subtype, presents significant treatment challenges. Cisplatin (CP)-based
regimens are central to the treatment of multiple solid tumors, but its use is
restricted due to its dose-related renal toxicity. We previously found that
fluorofenidone {1-[3-fluorophenyl]-5-methyl-2-[(1H)]-pyridone (AKF-PD)}
effectively reverses CP-induced acute kidney injury (AKI). However, it remains
unclear whether AKF-PD can synergistically ameliorate NSCLC when used together
with CP. Thus, this study sought to investigate the effect of AKF-PD on NSCLC
and examined its combinatory use with CP for cancer treatment.
METHODS: We conducted cell viability assays, 5-ethynyl-2'-deoxyuridine (EdU)
experiments, colony-forming assays, wound-healing tests, and Transwell
experiments in A549 and H1299 cells to explore the effects of AKF-PD on NSCLC.
We then detected the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers [i.e.,
epithelial cadherin (E-cadherin), matrix metallopeptidase 9 (MMP9), vimentin,
and snail family transcriptional repressor 1 (SNAIL)], phosphoinositide 3-kinase
(PI3K)/protein kinase B (AKT)/mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR), and
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), to identify the potential mechanisms of
AKF-PD. Further, via the combined use of AKF-PD and CP, we found that AKF-PD
enhanced the antitumor effect of CP, and we suggest that this may be due to its
inhibitory effect on EMT. We also examined the effect of combining AKF-PD and CP
in other cancer cell lines, including Hela, SiHA, MDA-MB-231, 5-8F, and UM-UC-3
cells.
RESULTS: AKF-PD significantly inhibited the proliferation and invasion of NSCLC
cells (A549 and H1299), suppressed the activation of the MAPK and PI3K/AKT/mTOR
pathways, and inhibited the EMT of the tumor cells. When AKF-PD was used in
combination with CP, these effects were further enhanced. We also found that
AKF-PD enhanced the anti-cancer effect of CP in a variety of cancer cell lines,
including cervical cancer (Hela cells and SiHA cells), nasopharyngeal cancer
(5-8F cells), triple-negative breast cancer (MDA-MB-231 cells), and bladder
cancer (UM-UC-3 cells).
CONCLUSIONS: AKF-PD not only mitigates CP-induced AKI but also enhances the
anti-cancer efficacy of CP. Our findings provide valuable insights into the
treatment of NSCLC and may have clinical applications.
BACKGROUND: Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is the leading cause of
noncancer-related mortality among differentiated thyroid cancer (DTC) survivors,
which accounts for a large portion of subsequent primary malignancies in
childhood cancer survivors. This study aims to assess the risk of cardiovascular
mortality among DTC as a second primary malignancy (DTC-2) patients compared
with DTC as a first primary malignancy (DTC-1) and the general population.
METHODS: Using the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results database, we
conducted a population-based cohort study including 159 395 DTC-1 and 20 010
DTC-2 patients diagnosed older than 30 between 1975 and 2020 and the
corresponding US population (71 214 642 person-years; 41 420 893 cardiovascular
deaths). Compared with general-population and DTC-1 patients, we calculated
incidence rate ratios (IRRs) of cardiovascular deaths among DTC-2 patients using
Poisson regression. To adjust for unmeasured confounders, we performed a nested,
case-crossover analysis among DTC-2 patients who died from CVD.
RESULTS: Although DTC-2 patients had a comparable risk compared with the
population (IRR 1.01) and a mildly increased risk of cardiovascular mortality
compared with DTC-1 patients (IRR 1.26), the association was pronounced among
individuals aged 30 to 74 years, especially 30 to 44 years (DTC-2 vs population:
IRR 8.89; DTC-2 vs DTC-1: IRR 3.00). The risk elevation was greatest within the
first month after diagnosis, compared with the population. The case-crossover
analysis confirmed these results.
CONCLUSION: DTC-2 patients are at increased risk of cardiovascular mortality.
Clinicians should carefully monitor CVD and manage other CVD-related factors,
such as exogenous thyroxine and emotional distress, for DTC-2 patients,
especially for those under 75 years.
NOVELTY AND IMPACT STATEMENTS: This study is the first comprehensive
investigation into the cardiovascular mortality of DTC-2, revealing a higher
risk compared to DTC-1 and the general population, especially for cases between
30 and 74 years old. The risk elevation was greatest within the first month
after diagnosis. These findings emphasize the restriction of thyroid hormone
suppression therapy and reinforce stress management to prevent premature DTC-2
patients from cardiovascular death.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer prognosis remains a significant challenge due to the
disease's molecular heterogeneity and complexity. Accurate predictive models are
critical for improving patient outcomes and tailoring personalized therapies.
METHODS: We developed a Machine Learning-assisted Telomerase Signature (MLTS) by
integrating multi-omics data from nine independent breast cancer datasets. Using
multiple machine learning algorithms, we identified six telomerase-related genes
significantly associated with patient survival. The predictive performance of
MLTS was evaluated against 66 existing breast cancer prognostic models across
diverse cohorts.
RESULTS: The MLTS demonstrated superior predictive accuracy, stability, and
reliability compared to other models. Patients with high MLTS scores exhibited
increased tumor mutational burden, chromosomal instability, and poor survival
outcomes. Single-cell RNA sequencing analysis further revealed higher MLTS
scores in aneuploid tumor cells, suggesting a role in cancer progression. Immune
profiling indicated distinct tumor microenvironment characteristics associated
with MLTS scores, potentially guiding therapeutic decisions.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings highlight the utility of MLTS as a robust prognostic
biomarker for breast cancer. The ability of MLTS to predict patient outcomes and
its association with key genomic and cellular features underscore its potential
as a target for personalized therapy. Future research may focus on integrating
MLTS with additional molecular signatures to enhance its clinical application in
precision oncology.
BACKGROUND: Given the widespread prevalence of breast cancer as a global
malignancy, there is a compelling need to delve into its risk determinants.
OBJECTIVE: This study aims to investigate the potential relationship between
indicators of left-handedness and breast cancer, employing systematic review,
meta-analysis, and Mendelian randomization methods.
DESIGN: Systematic review and meta-analysis.
METHODS: The systematic review and meta-analysis, encompassing case-control and
cohort designs, conducted a database search on June 17, 2022, utilizing Medline
and Embase. For Mendelian randomization analysis, the exposure variable,
left-handedness, was sourced from the UK Biobank. Data for breast cancer
outcomes were obtained from two cohorts: the Breast Cancer Association
Consortium and the Finnish Biobank (Finngen).
RESULTS: Eight studies were included in the meta-analysis to investigate the
correlation between left-handedness and breast cancer in females. The analysis
of cohort studies revealed a hazard ratio (HR) of 1.21 (95% confidence interval
(CI): 1.01-1.45), whereas case-control studies showed an odds ratio of 0.81 (95%
CI: 0.52-1.26). Subgroup analysis indicated an elevated HR in premenopausal
left-handed women. However, Mendelian randomization did not confirm a
significant association.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest a potential correlation between left-handedness
and breast cancer, particularly in premenopausal women. However, due to limited
studies and unclear supporting theories, definitive conclusions are premature.
BACKGROUND: Although there have been significant advancements in the treatment
modalities for gastric cancer (GC) in recent years, the overall prognosis
remains poor, particularly for individuals in advanced stages. The absence of a
sensitive tumor marker in GC is a crucial factor contributing to this challenge.
METHODS: Our study focused on investigating a newly discovered long noncoding
RNA (lncRNA) known as TCONS_00251376, which has been confirmed to exhibit
differential expression in GC compared to adjacent tissues. To further validate
these expression differences, we collected 22 pairs of GC and adjacent
noncancerous tissues. Subsequent cell function experiments and animal studies
were conducted to elucidate the role and underlying mechanisms of lncRNA
TCONS_00251376 in the development of GC.
RESULTS: The study revealed a significant upregulation of lncRNA TCONS_00251376
in cancer tissues (p < 0.01) and a consistent upregulation in GC cell lines
(AGS, MKN45, BGC-823, and MGC-803). Furthermore, it was observed that lncRNA
TCONS_00251376 played a promotive role in the proliferation, migration, and
invasion of GC cells. Subsequent analysis indicated that lncRNA TCONS_00251376
could upregulate the expression of ETV1, a factor associated with the prognosis
of GC.
CONCLUSIONS: Therefore, our findings suggest that lncRNA TCONS_00251376
functions as an oncogenic lncRNA, promoting tumorigenesis and progression by
regulating the expression of ETV1 gene. This highlights its potential as an
effective target for treating GC.
BACKGROUND: 'Breast cancer' the most common cancer amongst females in India.
Having good Quality of life (QoL) among the patients undergoing treatment is one
of the vital and significant factors for ensuring holistic approach to treatment
and well-being of cancer patients. The present study was conducted to assess the
QoL and its determinants among breast cancer patients undergoing treatment at a
tertiary care institute in western Maharashtra.
MATERIAL AND METHODOLOGY: 300 histopathologically confirmed breast cancer
patients undergoing treatment at a tertiary care centre were divided into three
groups to include 100 patients in each group. Group 1 (patients with duration of
treatment 1 to 2 years) Group 2 (patients with duration of treatment 2 to 5
years) and Group 3 (more than 5 years). Validated tool Function Assessment of
Cancer Therapy Breast specific (FACT-B) questionnaire was used to collect
information on QoL and analysed using appropriate statistical tests.
RESULTS: Mean age of patients was 53.2 + 10.08 years, 136 (45.33%) were from age
group 51 to 65 years. Majority of the patients 106 (35.33%) were educated till
secondary schooling and 172 (57.33 %) were belonging to the middle-upper class.
Lump in breast was most common presenting symptom in 235 (78.33%) cases followed
by nipple retraction. 275 (91.67 %) cases had infiltrating ductal Carcinoma and
144 (48%) patents were in Stage II cancer. Over all mean FACT-B score for QoL
was 104.02 + 18.65 out of 141. Mean FACT-B score for Group 1, Group 2 and Group
3 was 88.18 +17.20, 105.89 + 11.78 and 118.28 + 12.45 respectively with (p<
0.05), suggests significant improvement in QoL with increase in time elapsed
since treatment.
CONCLUSION: Socio-demographic factors, type of surgery and duration of treatment
had significant effect on QoL among breast cancer patients. Apropos physicians,
paramedic staff and domestic care givers need to be sensitised on importance of
QoL for collective and deliberate efforts to achieve holistic care. QoL can be
made integral part of breast cancer treatment and management policy or
programme.
BACKGROUND: Unique features and worse outcomes have been reported for breast
cancers among adolescents and young adults (AYAs; age 15-39 years). However,
there are few up-to-date and comprehensive data to analyze the disease burden of
AYA breast cancer.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The data of incidence, deaths, and disability-adjusted
life years (DALYs) owing to breast cancer was obtained from the Global Burden of
Disease (GBD) 2021. We computed estimated annual percentage changes (EAPCs) of
each indicator to capture the secular trend in breast cancer and conducted a
decomposition analysis to examine factors behind DALYs changes. We also
predicted the incident cases, deaths and DALYs to 2044.
RESULTS: From 1990 to 2021, the age-standardized incidence rate (ASIR)
experienced an increasing trend globally [EAPC: 0.87, 95% confidence interval
(CI) 0.77-0.97]. The age-standardized rates (ASRs) of male AYAs breast cancer
were all on the rise. The most significant increase trends in ASRs among female
AYAs occurred in North Africa and Middle East, while male AYAs showed the
highest increases in East Asia. Population growth contributed the most to the
growth of DALYs in East Asia. Frontier analysis showed that despite limited
resources, some underdeveloped countries still exhibit superior performance,
while other countries with higher sociodemographic index have great room for
improvement.
CONCLUSIONS: The global burden of AYAs breast cancer is grim, especially in
North Africa and Middle East. The significant increase in male AYAs breast
cancer burden, targeted prevention strategies may need to be developed for AYAs
breast cancer by sex and countries.
BACKGROUND: Neoadjuvant systemic therapy (NAT) represents an attractive option
for improved outcomes of early-stage breast cancer (BC) patients, as it can
significantly reduce tumor burden thus permitting breast-conserving resections.
Equally important, the eradication of viable cancer cells post-NAT, also known
as pathological complete response (pCR), has emerged as a strong prognostic
biomarker, reflecting tumor's biology and subsequent treatment responses. Yet to
date, no validated markers predictive of pCR have been identified.
METHODS: The present retrospective study aimed to explore the value of
neutrophil-tolymphocyte ratio (NLR) and platelet-to-lymphocyte ratio (PLR) as
potential predictors of pCR.
RESULTS: Despite no statistically significant associations have been reported,
NLR and PLR dynamics during NAT, as longitudinal inflammatory phenotypes, merit
further investigation in larger cohorts.
CONCLUSION: In the future, the integration of a comprehensive inflammatory
biomarker panel into clinical practice could assist in a priori treatment
selection process.
BACKGROUND: AminoIndex™ Cancer Screening (AICS breast) was developed as a breast
cancer screening test using multivariate analysis of plasma free amino acid
(PFAA) profiles. This study investigated the relationship between the AICS
breast rank and breast density on mammography (MMG) for the detection of breast
cancer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: MMG and blood samples were obtained preoperatively from
224 patients with breast cancer who did not receive neoadjuvant chemotherapy
between 2017 and 2019. PFAA concentration was measured using liquid
chromatography-mass spectrometry, and the AICS breast and AICS ranks were
calculated. Detection rates were compared between MMG (categories 3-5) and AICS
breasts (ranks B and C) according to breast density.
RESULTS: Breast density was classified as extremely dense in 9.4%,
heterogeneously dense in 48.2%, scattered in 29.9%, and fatty in 12.5% of
patients. Dense breasts (extremely dense and heterogeneously dense) represented
57.6%. The overall detection rate by MMG was 82.6% and significantly lower in
patients with dense breasts (74.4%) compared to non-dense breasts (93.7%). The
overall detection rate by AICS breast was 50.0%, with no difference between
patients with dense breasts (45.7%) and those with non-dense breasts (55.8%).
The combination of MMG and AICS breast increased the detection rate to 91.5%
overall, 88.3% in patients with dense breasts, and 95.8% in those with non-dense
breasts.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrated that the detection rate of AICS breast was
not associated with breast density, unlike MMG. Adding AICS breast to MMG may be
beneficial for breast cancer screening in patients with dense breasts.
BACKGROUND: Treatment of breast cancers with immunotherapy has so far achieved
limited success. Traditional immunotherapies focusing on cytotoxic T cells have
attained modest success, while the approval of phagocytic checkpoint blockers is
still pending. Coagulation proteases are crucial elements pertaining to cancer
growth and proliferation, but their relevance in altering the immunological
topography in tumours remain largely uncharted.
OBJECTIVE: In this study, we aim to examine whether FVIIa-driven PAR2 activation
and its subsequent signaling pathways assist cancer cells in evading phagocytic
macrophages.
METHODS: PBMC/THP-1 derived macrophages were co-cultured with MDA MB-468 cells
that were either pre-treated with or without FVIIa. The phagocytic activity of
macrophages was assessed through flow cytometry and immunofluorescence.
Additionally, we employed an allograft model using wild-type and PAR2 deleted
4T1 cells to investigate the impact of PAR2 activation on immune escape from
macrophages in an in vivo setting.
RESULTS: Our key findings provide evidence that FVIIa-induced PAR2 cleavage
ensues downstream signaling cascades thereby augmenting cellular miR-221 levels
which transcriptionally enhances both CD47 and STC1 expression assisting the
phagocytic escape from macrophages. STC1 dampens the surface expression of
calreticulin (CRT), a dominant pro-phagocytic signal thereby tilting it in
favour of phagocytic evasion. Mouse models using PAR2 depleted cells displayed
lesser tumor volumes and corresponding greater phagocytic events when blended
together with anti-CD47/PDL1 antibodies.
CONCLUSION: Conclusively we can summarize that PAR2 signaling initiates an
intrinsic mechanism of immune escape by diminishing phagocytosis of cancer
cells.
BACKGROUND: The ASTRO (American Society for Radiation Oncology) has recently
published new guidelines for the eligibility of partial breast irradiation
(PBI). This study aims to evaluate the eligibility rates of PBI according to the
ASTRO 2017 and 2024 guidelines.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: Patients diagnosed with pTis-T2N0 breast cancer in 2019
from three tertiary medical centers were accrued. All patients received standard
treatment, consisting of breast-conserving surgery followed by radiotherapy.
Subsequently, patients were classified according to the ASTRO 2017 and 2024
guidelines.
RESULTS: For invasive breast cancer, 785 patients were accrued, among whom 192
received PBI. Classification according to the ASTRO guidelines showed a
substantial increase in the proportion of patients eligible for PBI: 19.2% were
classified as 'suitable' under the ASTRO 2017 guidelines, while 42.4% were
classified as 'strongly recommended' under the ASTRO 2024 guidelines. Among 286
patients diagnosed with ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS), 50 (17.5%) received
PBI. The proportion of PBI-eligible patients nearly doubled, from 27.3% under
the ASTRO 2017 guidelines to 51.7% under the ASTRO 2024 guidelines. The expanded
age criterion from 50 to 40 years and the removal of the clear resection margin
requirement were key factors contributing to this substantial increase in both
invasive breast cancer and DCIS.
CONCLUSION: The eligibility for PBI has dramatically increased for both invasive
breast cancer and DCIS under the ASTRO 2024 guidelines. These findings suggest a
potential for increased use of PBI, offering individualized and optimized
treatment options in early breast cancer.
BACKGROUND: Air pollution is a significant risk factor for breast cancer.
However, epidemiological studies have yielded inconsistent results. Previous
systematic reviews and meta-analyses have identified an association between
nitrogen dioxide (NO2) exposure and the incidence of breast cancer, yet no
consistent association has been observed for particulate matter (PM). With
recent studies providing new evidence, updated meta-analyses are necessary.
METHODS: Relevant studies were identified through comprehensive literature
searches in the Web of Science and PubMed databases. The pooled effect estimates
for the associations of NO2, PM2.5, and PM10 with breast cancer incidence were
calculated using a random-effects model. Publication bias was corrected, and
sensitivity analyses were conducted to ensure the robustness of the findings.
Subgroup analyses were performed based on menopausal status, hormone receptor
subtype, and study region.
RESULTS: A total of 22 studies were included in this meta-analysis. The pooled
hazard ratios with 95 % confidence intervals (CIs) for breast cancer incidence
per 10 μg/m3 increase in NO2 and PM2.5 were 1.02 (95 % CI: 1.01, 1.03) and 1.06
(95 % CI: 1.02, 1.11), respectively. No significant association was observed
between PM10 and breast cancer incidence. NO2 and PM10 exposures were
significantly associated with the incidence of postmenopausal breast cancer. The
associations of NO2, PM2.5, and PM10 with estrogen/progesterone
receptor-positive (ER+/PR+) breast cancer were not significantly different from
those with estrogen/progesterone receptor-negative (ER-/PR-) breast cancer.
Exposure to both NO2 and PM2.5 was associated with breast cancer incidence in
Europe, whereas in North America, only NO2 exposure showed a significant
association.
CONCLUSION: This study is the first to document a significant association
between long-term exposure to ambient PM2.5 and breast cancer incidence through
meta-analysis. Air pollution has a pronounced impact on postmenopausal breast
cancer, and the strength of the association between specific air pollutants and
breast cancer incidence varies across regions. These findings suggest that
long-term exposure to NO2 and PM2.5 may increase the incidence of breast cancer.
BACKGROUND: The BOADICEA model predicts breast cancer risk using cancer family
history, epidemiological and genetic data. We evaluated its validity in a large
prospective cohort.
METHODS: We assessed model calibration, discrimination and risk classification
ability in 217,885 women (6,838 incident breast cancers) aged 40-70 years old of
self-reported White ethnicity with no previous cancer from the UK Biobank.
Age-specific risk classification was assessed using relative risk (RR)
thresholds equivalent to the absolute lifetime risk categories of < 17%, 17-30%
and ≥30%, recommended by the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence
guidelines. We predicted 10-year risks using BOADICEA v.6 considering cancer
family history, questionnaire-based risk factors, a 313-SNP polygenic score and
pathogenic variants. Mammographic density data were not available.
RESULTS: The PRS was the most discriminative risk factor (AUC=0.65).
Discrimination was highest when considering all risk factors (AUC=0.66). The
model was well calibrated overall (E/O=0.99, 95%CI=0.97-1.02; calibration
slope=0.99, 95%CI:0.99-1.00), and in deciles of predicted risks. Discrimination
was similar in women younger and older than 50 years. There was some
underprediction in women under age 50 (E/O=0.89, 95%CI=0.84-0.94; calibration
slope=0.96, 95%CI:0.94-0.97), which was explained by the higher breast cancer
incidence in UK Biobank than the UK population incidence in this age group. The
model classified 87.2%, 11.4% and 1.4% of women in RR categories <1.6, 1.6-3.1
and ≥3.1, identifying 25.6% of incident breast cancer cases in category
BACKGROUND: Understanding the distribution of type specific human papillomavirus
(HPV) genotypes in screen-detected lesions is crucial to differentiate women who
are at a higher risk of developing cervical cancer. This study aimed to find out
high-risk HPV genotype distribution among women of the coastal districts of
Bangladesh.
METHODS: This cross-sectional study conducted from January 2023 to December 2023
aimed to investigate the prevalence and distribution patterns of high-risk HPV
genotypes among ever-married women aged 30-60 years residing in three coastal
districts of Bangladesh. Sampling was purposive, with 300 participants per
district. Exclusion criteria included prior cervical precancer or cancer
treatment, hysterectomy, cervical amputation, and pregnancy. HPV DNA specimens
were collected and tested using Cobas 4800. Positive cases underwent further
genotype analysis with GenoFlowTM HPV Array Test Kit. Statistical analysis
utilized SPSS version 25.0, employing Chi-square and Fisher's Exact tests.
RESULTS: Among 900 participants HR-HPV prevalence was 2.56%. HPV 16 was the most
prevalent genotype (38.46%), followed by HPV 66 and HPV 68 (11.54% each). Single
infections of HPV 16 predominated (39.13%), while for co-infections HPV 66 and
HPV 68 were most common (13.04%). HR-HPV positivity increased with age, peaking
at 5.5% in the 55-60 years' age group. Participants education level, occupation,
income, and reproductive history showed no significant association with HPV
positivity. District-wise prevalence varied insignificantly, with Jhalokathi
exhibiting the highest (3.0%), followed by Cox's Bazar (2.7%), and Bagerhat
(2.0%). HPV 16 was the predominant genotype across districts, with Cox's Bazar
and Jhalokathi demonstrating greater genotype diversity than Bagerhat.
CONCLUSION: The study concludes that among ever-married women in the coastal
districts of Bangladesh, there is a low prevalence of high-risk HPV. The
predominant high-risk HPV genotypes identified were HPV 16, followed by HPV 66
and 68. These findings hold significant implications for policy makers,
providing guidance for targeted screening strategies and vaccination programs.
BACKGROUND: Paclitaxel has a boxed warning for causing severe hypersensitivity
reactions, however, the majority (95%) of these reactions occur during the first
or second infusion. Corticosteroids can reduce the incidence of paclitaxel
hypersensitivity reactions from 30% to around 1%-3% but are not without adverse
effects. Current practice at our institution is to prescribe dexamethasone 20 mg
to be given orally 12 and 6 hours prior to paclitaxel infusion, however, some
medical oncology providers have elected to decrease or omit dexamethasone
premedication.
METHODS: This retrospective study analyzed dexamethasone dose adjustment(s)
prior to paclitaxel and the incidence of hypersensitivity reactions. Patients
were included if they were ≥19 years, had breast cancer, received ≥3 doses of
paclitaxel as part of (neo)adjuvant therapy, and received reduced or omitted
oral dexamethasone prior to paclitaxel between January 1, 2015, and July 31,
2023. The primary outcome was incidence of rescue medication administration in
those with reduced or omitted premedication dexamethasone. Secondary outcomes
included dexamethasone prescribing practices and the incidence of
corticosteroid-associated insomnia and hyperglycemia.
RESULTS: The analysis included 306 infusions (corticosteroid reduction: 283;
omission: 23). A hypersensitivity reaction requiring the administration of
rescue medications occurred in 5 infusions in the reduction group (1.6%) and 0
infusions in the omission group, leading to a 1.6% overall incidence of
infusions requiring the administration of rescue medications.
CONCLUSION: In conclusion, decreasing home dexamethasone prior to paclitaxel
infusions did not increase the incidence of hypersensitivity reactions compared
to rates reported in the literature.
BACKGROUND: Whether surgical axillary staging as part of breast-conserving
therapy can be omitted without compromising survival has remained unclear.
METHODS: In this prospective, randomized, noninferiority trial, we investigated
the omission of axillary surgery as compared with sentinel-lymph-node biopsy in
patients with clinically node-negative invasive breast cancer staged as T1 or T2
(tumor size, ≤5 cm) who were scheduled to undergo breast-conserving surgery. We
report here the per-protocol analysis of invasive disease-free survival (the
primary efficacy outcome). To show the noninferiority of the omission of
axillary surgery, the 5-year invasive disease-free survival rate had to be at
least 85%, and the upper limit of the confidence interval for the hazard ratio
for invasive disease or death had to be below 1.271.
RESULTS: A total of 5502 eligible patients (90% with clinical T1 cancer and 79%
with pathological T1 cancer) underwent randomization in a 1:4 ratio. The
per-protocol population included 4858 patients; 962 were assigned to undergo
treatment without axillary surgery (the surgery-omission group), and 3896 to
undergo sentinel-lymph-node biopsy (the surgery group). The median follow-up was
73.6 months. The estimated 5-year invasive disease-free survival rate was 91.9%
(95% confidence interval [CI], 89.9 to 93.5) among patients in the
surgery-omission group and 91.7% (95% CI, 90.8 to 92.6) among patients in the
surgery group, with a hazard ratio of 0.91 (95% CI, 0.73 to 1.14), which was
below the prespecified noninferiority margin. The analysis of the first
primary-outcome events (occurrence or recurrence of invasive disease or death
from any cause), which occurred in a total of 525 patients (10.8%), showed
apparent differences between the surgery-omission group and the surgery group in
the incidence of axillary recurrence (1.0% vs. 0.3%) and death (1.4% vs. 2.4%).
The safety analysis indicates that patients in the surgery-omission group had a
lower incidence of lymphedema, greater arm mobility, and less pain with movement
of the arm or shoulder than patients who underwent sentinel-lymph-node biopsy.
CONCLUSIONS: In this trial involving patients with clinically node-negative, T1
or T2 invasive breast cancer (90% with clinical T1 cancer and 79% with
pathological T1 cancer), omission of surgical axillary staging was noninferior
to sentinel-lymph-node biopsy after a median follow-up of 6 years. (Funded by
the German Cancer Aid; INSEMA ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02466737.).
BACKGROUND: Nipple-areolar complex (NAC) reconstruction can be broadly
categorized into surgical reconstruction, tattooing, or both. NAC tattooing has
shown continued advances recently, resulting in increased discussion of
tattoo-only methods within the literature.
OBJECTIVE: This study aims to quantify recent trends in choice of NAC
reconstruction and explore driving factors.
METHODS: Patients who underwent postmastectomy breast and NAC reconstruction
between January 2007 and December 2021 at a single academic institution were
reviewed and grouped based on method of NAC reconstruction: (1) surgical-only,
(2) tattoo-only, and (3) both surgical and tattoo. Trends were assessed in each
group using Poisson regression.
RESULTS: The study included 138 patients; 17.4% (n = 24) were in the
surgical-only group, 16.7% (n = 23) tattoo-only, and 65.9% (n = 91) both
surgical and tattoo. Over the 15-year period, patients receiving tattoo-only NAC
reconstruction significantly increased (β = 0.173, P < 0.0001), while those
receiving both surgical and tattoo significantly decreased (β = -0.064, P =
0.007). There were no significant changes in surgical-only (β = 0.013, P =
0.563) or total (any type) NAC reconstruction (β = -0.013, P = 0.503). Rates of
breast reconstruction significantly increased (β = 0.062, P < 0.0001). Variables
such as autologous versus implant-based, unilateral versus bilateral, revision
number, and radiation were stable over time and were not significantly
associated with NAC reconstruction method.
CONCLUSIONS: There is a significant trend toward tattoo-only and away from
surgical-only reconstruction over the past 15 years, highlighting the importance
of access to tattoo-based NAC reconstruction as part of comprehensive breast
reconstruction care. The less invasive nature of tattooing and increase in
tattoo quality are possible reasons for the increase in popularity.
BACKGROUND: Metabolic reprogramming is a hallmark of cancer, including
alterations in the hexosamine biosynthesis pathway (HBP).
Glutamine-fructose-6-phosphate transaminase 1 (GFPT1) is the key regulatory
enzyme in the HBP; however, its role in invasive breast carcinoma remains
underexplored.
METHODS: This study utilized integrated data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)
to assess GFPT1 expression in breast cancer (BRCA) patients. Functional
enrichment and mutational landscape analyses were performed, along with
chemosensitivity predictions. In vitro experiments were conducted by silencing
GFPT1 in malignant breast epithelial cells to evaluate changes in proliferation,
migration, and apoptosis.
RESULTS: Elevated GFPT1 expression was linked to advanced-stage breast cancer
and identified as an independent prognostic marker for overall survival (OS).
High GFPT1 levels were associated with increased cytoplasmic translation,
activation of oncogenic pathways, and infiltration of M2 macrophages. The
GFPT1-High group also showed a higher mutational burden, with frequent TP53
mutations. Chemosensitivity analysis revealed increased IC50 values for
chemotherapy drugs in this group. GFPT1 silencing led to reduced cell
proliferation and migration, along with enhanced apoptosis.
CONCLUSION: These findings indicate that GFPT1 is a novel prognostic biomarker
and a predictive indicator of chemotherapy response in invasive breast
carcinoma. GFPT1 influences mRNA translation, cell cycle regulation, and M2
macrophage infiltration, thereby promoting cancer cell proliferation and
metastasis.
BACKGROUND: Regulatory T (Treg) cells play a strategic role in maintaining
immune homeostasis and their functions are closely linked to the development of
different diseases, including cancer. This study aims to investigate the
evolution patterns and popular research topics of Treg cells through
bibliometric analysis.
METHOD: The Web of Science Core Collection database was used to extract
publications related to Treg cells, which were then subjected to bibliometric
analysis and visualization through VOSviewer, CiteSpace, and R software.
RESULTS: Between 2003 and 2023, a total of 666 articles were published. China
and the United States had the highest citation counts, with Fudan University,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, and Tarbiat Modares University being the leading
research institutions. Beckhove Philipp from the German Cancer Research Center
and the National Center for Tumor Diseases in Heidelberg, and Christophe from
the Cancer Research Center of Lyon, were the most prolific authors. Sakaguchi
Shimon from the Immunology Frontier Research Center at Osaka University was the
most cited author. "Frontiers in Immunology" published the most articles, while
"Journal of Immunology" received the highest co-citations. Key terms in Treg
research include immunotherapy, tumor microenvironment, prognosis,
immunosuppression, and PD-L1. Among these, immunotherapy, prognosis, PD-L1, and
immunosuppression have emerged as focal points of research in recent years.
CONCLUSION: With active collaboration worldwide, research on Treg cells is
rapidly advancing. Focusing on Treg cells as a potential target for cancer
treatment shows great promise for future research, especially in terms of
practical applications. This could offer valuable direction and fresh
perspectives for further exploration of Treg cells in the medical field.
BACKGROUND: In breast cancer, several gene expression assays have been developed
to provide a more personalised treatment. This study focuses on the prediction
of two molecular proliferation signatures: an 11-gene proliferation score and
the MKI67 proliferation marker gene. The aim was to assess whether these could
be predicted from digital whole slide images (WSIs) using deep learning models.
METHODS: WSIs and RNA-sequencing data from 819 invasive breast cancer patients
were included for training, and models were evaluated on an internal test set of
172 cases as well as on 997 cases from a fully independent external test set.
Two deep Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) models were optimised using WSIs and
gene expression readouts from RNA-sequencing data of either the proliferation
signature or the proliferation marker, and assessed using Spearman correlation
(r). Prognostic performance was assessed through Cox proportional hazard
modelling, estimating hazard ratios (HR).
RESULTS: Optimised CNNs successfully predicted the proliferation score and
proliferation marker on the unseen internal test set (ρ = 0.691(p < 0.001) with
R2 = 0.438, and ρ = 0.564 (p < 0.001) with R2 = 0.251 respectively) and on the
external test set (ρ = 0.502 (p < 0.001) with R2 = 0.319, and ρ = 0.403
(p < 0.001) with R2 = 0.222 respectively). Patients with a high proliferation
score or marker were significantly associated with a higher risk of recurrence
or death in the external test set (HR = 1.65 (95% CI: 1.05-2.61) and HR = 1.84
(95% CI: 1.17-2.89), respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: The results from this study suggest that gene expression levels of
proliferation scores can be predicted directly from breast cancer morphology in
WSIs using CNNs and that the predictions provide prognostic information that
could be used in research as well as in the clinical setting.
BACKGROUND: Models for accurately predicting the likelihood of BRCA1/2 germline
pathogenic variants (PVs) based on a large cohort of unselected patients with
breast cancer are limited.
METHODS: A logistic regression model to predict the BRCA1/2 carrier probability,
named PKCBRCA, was established and validated based on 10 167 unselected Chinese
patients with breast cancer treated in Peking University Cancer Hospital between
October 2003 and August 2020. All patients were tested for BRCA1/2 germline
variants. The discrimination and calibration of the model were assessed.
RESULTS: A total of 601 (5.9%) patients carried BRCA1/2 germline PVs in the
entire cohort of 10 167 unselected patients with breast cancer. The cohort was
separated into a training set (n=6331; 387 (6.1%) BRCA1/2 carriers) and a
validation set (n=3836; 214 (5.6%) BRCA1/2 carriers). Five variables strongly
associated with BRCA1/2 carrier probability were incorporated in the
establishment of PKCBRCA including age of diagnosis, bilateral breast cancer,
family history of breast or ovarian cancer, hormone receptor and ERBB2. PKCBRCA
showed a good ability to discriminate both in the training set (area under the
receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC)=0.77) and in the validation set
BACKGROUND: Social risks are negatively associated with receipt of cancer
preventive care. As knowledge is lacking on the pathways underlying these
associations, we investigated associations between patient-reported social risks
and colorectal (CRC), cervical (CVC), and breast cancer (BC) screening order
provision and screening completion.
METHODS: This study included patients eligible for CRC, CVC, or BC screening at
186 community-based clinics between July 1, 2015 and February 29, 2020. Outcomes
included: up-to-date status for indicated cancer screenings at baseline; percent
of subsequent study months in which patients were up to date on screenings;
screening order receipt; and screening completion. Independent variables were
patient-reported food insecurity, transportation barriers, and housing
instability. Analyses used covariate-adjusted generalized estimating equation
models, stratified by social risk.
RESULTS: Patients with documented social risks were less likely to be up-to-date
on any cancer screening at baseline and in most cases had a lower rate of total
study months up to date on screenings. All cancer screenings were ordered less
often for food-insecure patients. CVC screening was ordered less often for
transportation-insecure patients. The likelihood of completing a screening test
differed significantly by select social risks: CVC and CRC screening rates were
lower in food-insecure patients and CRC screening rates were lower in
transportation-insecure patients. Likelihood of BC screening completion did not
differ by social risk status.
DISCUSSION: Social risks affect both the ordering and receipt of cancer
screening. Research is needed on strategies to mitigate the impact of different
social risks on cancer early detection services.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer stem cells (BCSC) are a subpopulation responsible for
cancer resistance and relapse. The receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-Β
ligand (RANKL) is a cytokine capable of activating RANK and LGR4 receptors.
RANKL/RANK signaling maintains the self-renewal of BCSCs, however, the effect of
RANKL via LGR4 remains unclear. Evidence from osteoclasts suggests that
RANKL/LGR4 axis disrupts RANK signaling, leading to opposing cellular responses.
Anti-RANKL inhibitors are potential agents for eradicating CSCs, but their
effect on RANKL/LGR4 signal has not been demonstrated.
OBJECTIVE: This project aimed to elucidate the role of RANKL in regulating
stemness depending on the expression of its receptors.
METHODS: We use in vitro and in vivo approaches to evaluate the effects of RANKL
inhibition in stemness in low or high-LGR4 expressing cells. Furthermore, we
analyze the effects of RANKL stimulation on the stemness of LGR4 or RANK
overexpressing cells. Additionally, we evaluated the impact of RANKL/LGR4
signaling in the activity of Wnt/β-catenin and NF-κB signaling pathways.
RESULTS: Our findings indicated that elevated RANKL expression is related to a
favorable prognosis in patients with high LGR4 levels. Furthermore, RANKL
inhibition decreased BCSC properties in LGR4-low cell lines, while it promoted
migration in LGR4-high cells. Additionally, the RANKL/RANK axis activated NF-κB
signaling and enhanced BCSCs in RANK-overexpressing cells. In contrast, in
LGR4-overexpressing cells, RANKL failed to activate NF-κB but instead inhibited
the Wnt/β-catenin pathway, leading to a reduction in BCSCs.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that RANKL exerts different responses according
to the expression of its receptors.
BACKGROUND: Papillary thyroid cancer (PTC) is among the most prevalent forms of
endocrine malignancy with a rapid rise in incidence rates worldwide; however,
the composition and characteristics of its immune microenvironment is poorly
understand. Here, this work investigated the precise function of Dipeptidyl
peptidase 4 (DPP4) in tumor-infiltrated T cells within PTC by investigating its
role in cytokine-mediated signaling pathways.
METHODS: TCGA and GEO data as well as human PTC specimens confirmed the
expression of DPP4 in PTC. The CIBERSORT and TIMER tool were used to analyze the
distribution of tumor-infiltrating immune cells in PTC. CD8+ T cells from PTC
patient's peripheral blood were cultured and used in a three-dimensional model
for direct co-culture with PTC tumors to investigate DPP4 function.
RESULTS: Bioinformatic analyses has uncovered a significant upregulation of
DPP4, which enhances the survival and migration of PTC cells in vitro. DPP4
upregulation significantly correlated with advanced grades, stages, and poor
progression-free survival. DPP4 influences immune function and the exhaustion of
CD8+ T cells through the IL13-IL13RA2 axis. The inhibition of DPP4 reduces CD8+
T cell exhaustion and IL13 secretion, while also blocking the IL13-IL13RA2 axis,
thereby promoting the mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition of PTC cells.
CONCLUSION: Blocking DPP4 leads to the conversion of exhausted CD8+ T cells with
decreased IL13 level, resulting in downregulation of IL13RA2 to promote
mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition of PTC cells. This highlights DPP4 as a
potential therapeutic target, particularly between CD8+ T cells and PTC cells
via IL13-IL13RA2 axis, and represents a novel avenue for combined immunotherapy
in PTC.
BACKGROUND: Since 2020, trastuzumab deruxtecan (T-DXd) has been used in France
for patients with previously treated human epidermal growth factor receptor 2
(HER2)-positive or HER2-low metastatic breast cancer (mBC). We aimed to describe
the clinical characteristics, outcomes, and potential toxicities among patients
receiving T-DXd for HER2-positive and HER2-low mBC.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Using the French National Health Data System (SNDS), we
identified patients who initiated T-DXd for mBC from 30 September 2020 to 30
September 2023. Follow-up data were available through 31 December 2023. Patients
were categorized into three groups according to HER2 expression and line of
treatment: HER2-positive mBC receiving T-DXd in the third (HER2+ 3L) or second
line (HER2+ 2L) and HER2-low mBC receiving T-DXd in the second line
(HER2-low2L). We describe their characteristics and report the Kaplan-Meier
estimates of overall survival (OS) and incidence of hospitalization.
RESULTS: The cohort comprised 5890 patients, including 2010 (34.1%) HER2+ 3L,
1260 (21.4%) HER2+ 2L, and 2620 (44.5%) HER2-low2L. For the three respective
groups, the median age at inclusion was 59 years [interquartile range (IQR)
51-69 years], 59 years (50-68 years), and 61 years (52-70 years); 34.8%, 30.2%,
and 16.0% had brain metastases; 14.2%, 13.7%, and 13.4% had a current or history
of cardiovascular disease. Median OS was 30.2 months [95% confidence interval
(CI) 28.1-33.5 months] for HER2+ 3L patients, was not reached for HER2+ 2L
patients, and was 16.8 months (95% CI 14.5 months-not reached) for HER2-low2L
patients. The incidence of hospitalization for cardiac, respiratory, digestive,
and hematological disorders was similar for HER2-positive patients treated in
the second or third line, whereas HER2-low patients had higher incidence rates
for these events.
CONCLUSION: In this large French observational study, T-DXd users were older,
had more comorbidities, and had more brain metastases than patients included in
registration trials. The rapid expansion of clinical indications of T-DXd calls
for proactive surveillance and timely management of potentially life-threatening
T-DXd-related toxicity.
BACKGROUND: About 15-20 % of patients with metastatic breast cancer (mBC) can
experience oligoprogressive disease (OPD) in ≤ 5 sites of disease. Patients with
OPD may benefit from metastasis-directed stereotactic radiotherapy (SBRT) to all
sites of cancer progression while maintaining the same systemic treatment,
aiming to prolong the time to next systemic treatment (NEST). This study aims to
assess the outcomes provided by this multimodal strategy.
METHODS: Prospective-retrospective, single-center, cohort study including
consecutive patients who received SBRT to all extracranial OPD sites (≤ 5), from
January 2011 to June 2023, without changing systemic therapy, according to the
multidisciplinary tumor board's indication. The primary endpoint was
post-radiotherapy progression-free survival (pRT-PFS). A sample size of 130
patients was needed to estimate a median pRT-PFS of 8 months with a 95 %
confidence interval (95 %CI) ranging from 5.4 (considered clinically
significant) to 10.6 months.
RESULTS: 129 patients were included: 99 (77 %) had hormone
receptor-positive/HER2-negative (HR+/HER2-) disease, 116 (90 %) had ≤ 2
oligoprogressive lesions, 118 (91 %) presented with non-visceral OPD involving
bones or lymph nodes. Patients experienced OPD after a median PFS on systemic
therapy (pre-OPD PFS) of 11.3 months (95 % CI, 8.7-13.0). Median pRT-PFS was
11.3 months (95 % CI, 9.1-13.5) and median NEST was 13.6 months (95 % CI,
11.5-15.2). Only 19 (15 %) patients experienced a subsequent PD in the OPD sites
treated with SBRT.
CONCLUSION: Patients with oligoprogressive mBC, especially with HR+/HER2-
disease and non-visceral OPD after a durable pre-OPD PFS, benefit from
OPD-directed SBRT while maintaining the same systemic treatment, suggesting its
broader implementation in clinical practice.
BACKGROUND: Though anthracyclines are the commonly used chemotherapeutics for
cancer treatment, close monitoring of patients is required due to its well
reported cardiotoxicity. The present study evaluates the role of biomarkers
[N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) and high sensitivity
cardiac troponin-T (hs-cTnT)] in early prediction of cardiotoxicity in patients
with breast and ovarian cancer who received anthracyclines.
METHODS: This was a single-center observational study conducted between
August-2018 and January-2020. Doxorubicin was used as an anthracycline at a dose
of 50 mg/m2 per cycle. All the patients underwent echocardiography before the
start and at 3 months, 6 months and 12 months after chemotherapy. NT-proBNP and
hs-cTnT levels were measured before as baseline and within 24 hours of the first
and last cycle of anthracycline-based chemotherapy.
RESULTS: A total of 72 patients with breast and ovarian cancer participated in
the study. The mean age of patients was 49.4 ± 10.3 years. Sixty six (91.7%)
patients had breast cancer and 9 (12.5%) patients developed cardiotoxicity. Mean
age of the patients who developed cardiotoxicity was 55.00 ± 12.5 years. The
level of NT-proBNP and hs-cTnT were significantly increased after the last cycle
of anthracycline in patients who developed cardiotoxicity.
CONCLUSION: The measurement of NT-proBNP and hs-cTnT levels after anthracycline
administration helps detect early sub-clinical cardiotoxicity and thus can
assist in modification of therapeutic regimens and initiation of heart failure
therapy to prevent future cardiac events.
BACKGROUND: The current study analyzes the pattern of recurrence/relapse in
breast cancer patients belonging to different receptor subtypes to help enhance
therapeutic and surveillance methods.
METHODS: This is an observational prospective study of a cohort of 543 patients
from South India. Associations between various factors and their significance in
relapse were assessed by odds ratio (OR), Chi-square test, and two-sided P
value.
RESULTS: Relapse of cancer in all receptor subtypes was significantly associated
with stage III (P = 0.0029). Of the 48 patients who had a relapse of cancer, 42%
had relapsed at a distance recurrence (DR), 23% (P = 0.02) had loco/locoregional
recurrence (LLR) and the rest had relapsed at distant and loco/locoregional
sites. HER2+ (human epidermal growth factor receptor) (83%) and hormone receptor
(HR+/HER2-) (77%) patients had higher DR rates with an OR of 2 (95% Confidence
Interval, 0.6-6) and 0.47 (95% CI, 0.1-2.1), respectively compared to TNBC
(triple-negative breast cancer) patients. TNBCs (80%) had higher LLR rates over
HER2+ (50%) and HR+/HER2- (44%) with an OR of 2 (95% CI, 0.6-6) and 2.1 (95% CI,
0.47-9.3), respectively. Bones and lungs in HR+/HER2- patients, liver and lungs
for HER2 + patients, and bones in TNBC patients were the preferred sites for
metastasis. The number of metastatic sites followed the order, TNBCs >
BACKGROUND: Hormone receptor (HR)+ breast cancer is poorly responsive to immune
checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs). In some settings, radiation therapy (RT) has been
shown to mediate immunostimulatory effects and promote ICI sensitivity.
METHODS: We investigated whether hypofractionated RT may be successfully
combined with ICIs in a mouse model of multifocal, metachronous HR+ mammary
carcinogenesis. We hypothesized that focal RT targeting the first detectable
(primary) tumor combined with ICIs may generate effective immunity, hence
delaying the development of new lesions.
RESULTS: Focal RT in various doses and fractionations limited primary tumor
growth, with an optimum for a 20 Gy X 2 regimen (ablative in ∼90% of mice). The
degree of primary disease control, however, did not necessarily correlate with
overall survival (OS) extension, owing to changes in the development of new
neoplastic lesions contributing to global tumor burden. Adding a PD-1 blocker to
focal RT delivered in a 10 Gy X 3, 20 Gy X 2 or 8 Gy X 6 regimen failed to alter
OS extension enabled by RT alone. Similar results were obtained with a CTLA4
blocker, an IL1B inhibitor, and a PD-1 blocker plus recombinant FLT3LG when
combined with the 10 Gy X 3 regimen.
CONCLUSIONS: In this model of HR+ mammary carcinogenesis, RT to the primary
tumor ameliorates OS (to an extent depending on dose and fractionation).
Increasing local control by RT alone or RT plus immunotherapy beyond a hitherto
undefined threshold, however, does not necessarily inhibit the development of
subsequent non-irradiated neoplasms and hence does not necessarily provide extra
OS benefits.
BACKGROUND: The aim of our retrospective study was to describe the
immunophenotypic characteristics of neuroendocrine breast neoplasm (BNEN), a
peculiar and rare type of breast carcinoma.
METHODS: Pathological data from 51 patients affected by BNEN were
retrospectively evaluated, and 44 patients were considered eligible (7 patients
with incomplete data were excluded). The patients were followed in six different
Italian hospitals between 2009 and 2019. The histological samples, collected by
biopsies and/or surgery pieces, were analyzed to determine: 1) tumor histology;
2) immunophenotypic pattern; 3) presence of lymphatic infiltration; 4) presence
of necrosis.
RESULTS: The median age of the patients included in our analysis was 70 years
(67.6±13.7 years). As concerns the histological type we identified 7 cases of
well-differentiated neuroendocrine carcinomas (16%), 8 cases of poorly
differentiated/small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma (18%), 29 cases of breast
carcinomas with neuroendocrine differentiation (66%). From the analysis of
breast-specific immunophenotype we identified: 24 cases (54%) of Luminal A
pattern; 9 cases (20%) of Luminal B pattern; 8 case (18%) of triple negative
pattern. The presence of lymphatic infiltration was assessed in 29 samples and
it was observed in 13 cases (45%), necrosis was assessed in 29 samples and was
absent in 72% of all cases (21 samples). Neuroendocrine markers expression was
heterogeneous with a prevalence of synaptophysin (positivity in 95%);
chromogranin A was evaluated in 31 samples and it was positive in 58% of cases.
CONCLUSIONS: in our series BNENs mainly affect a post-menopausal population and
luminal A pattern is the most frequent immunophenotype. As expected, lymphatic
infiltration is most frequently reported in invasive breast cancer with
neuroendocrine differentiation; necrosis is absent in well-differentiated
neuroendocrine carcinomas. Synaptophysin and chromogranin A are important
markers for the diagnosis of BNEN.
BACKGROUND: Imlunestrant is a next-generation, brain-penetrant, oral selective
estrogen-receptor (ER) degrader that delivers continuous ER inhibition, even in
cancers with mutations in the gene encoding ERα (ESR1).
METHODS: In a phase 3, open-label trial, we enrolled patients with ER-positive,
human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-negative advanced breast cancer
that recurred or progressed during or after aromatase inhibitor therapy,
administered alone or with a cyclin-dependent kinase 4 and 6 (CDK4/6) inhibitor.
Patients were assigned in a 1:1:1 ratio to receive imlunestrant, standard
endocrine monotherapy, or imlunestrant-abemaciclib. Primary end points were
investigator-assessed progression-free survival with imlunestrant as compared
with standard therapy among patients with ESR1 mutations and among all patients
and with imlunestrant-abemaciclib as compared with imlunestrant among all
patients who had undergone randomization concurrently.
RESULTS: Overall, 874 patients underwent randomization, with 331 assigned to
imlunestrant, 330 to standard therapy, and 213 to imlunestrant-abemaciclib.
Among 256 patients with ESR1 mutations, the median progression-free survival was
5.5 months with imlunestrant and 3.8 months with standard therapy. The estimated
restricted mean survival time at 19.4 months was 7.9 months (95% confidence
interval [CI], 6.8 to 9.1) with imlunestrant and 5.4 months (95% CI, 4.6 to 6.2)
with standard therapy (difference, 2.6 months; 95% CI, 1.2 to 3.9; P<0.001). In
the overall population, the median progression-free survival was 5.6 months with
imlunestrant and 5.5 months with standard therapy (hazard ratio for progression
or death, 0.87; 95% CI, 0.72 to 1.04; P = 0.12). Among 426 patients in the
comparison of imlunestrant-abemaciclib with imlunestrant, the median
progression-free survival was 9.4 months and 5.5 months, respectively (hazard
ratio, 0.57; 95% CI, 0.44 to 0.73; P<0.001). The incidence of grade 3 or higher
adverse events was 17.1% with imlunestrant, 20.7% with standard therapy, and
48.6% with imlunestrant-abemaciclib.
CONCLUSIONS: Among patients with ER-positive, HER2-negative advanced breast
cancer, treatment with imlunestrant led to significantly longer progression-free
survival than standard therapy among those with ESR1 mutations but not in the
overall population. Imlunestrant-abemaciclib significantly improved
progression-free survival as compared with imlunestrant, regardless of
ESR1-mutation status. (Funded by Eli Lilly; EMBER-3 ClinicalTrials.gov number,
BACKGROUND: Metastasectomy is a useful adjunct in the management of metastatic
cancer. Widespread adoption of novel targeted and immunotherapies has improved
the survival profiles of multiple malignancies, which has potentially altered
the role of metastasectomy. This study aimed to characterize trends in
metastasectomy across five primary cancers eligible for these therapies.
METHODS: The National Inpatient Sample was used to identify patients who
underwent metastasectomy in the United States (2016-2021). Patients with
procedure codes for resection of the lung, liver, adrenal gland, brain, or small
bowel and concurrent diagnosis codes for secondary malignant neoplasm of that
site were included. Subjects were subcategorized by primary malignancy:
colorectal cancer, lung cancer, breast cancer, melanoma, or renal cancer. Sample
weights were used to produce national estimates, which were incidence adjusted
by primary malignancy. Trends in utilization were calculated with average annual
percent change (AAPC) and linear regression coefficients.
RESULTS: Colorectal cancer was the most frequent indication for metastasectomy
(n = 57,644 cases), followed by lung cancer (n = 55,090 cases), breast cancer
(n = 12,616 cases), renal cancer (n = 8427 cases), and melanoma (n = 5658
cases). Utilization of metastasectomy increased over the study period for breast
cancer (AAPC, +10.6%; p = .013) and melanoma (AAPC, +8.3%; p = .040) but did not
change for lung cancer (AAPC, -1.6%; p = .26), colorectal cancer (AAPC, +0.3%;
p = .83), or renal cancer (AAPC, +2.3%; p = .36).
CONCLUSIONS: Between 2016 and 2021, utilization of metastasectomy increased
significantly for melanoma and breast cancer. The role of metastasectomy will
likely continue to develop as new treatment protocols improve survival profiles
for patients with metastatic disease.
BACKGROUND: Anoikis disrupts the normal apoptotic process in cells, leading to
abnormal proliferation and migration, thereby promoting tumor formation and
development. However, the role of anoikis in bladder urothelial carcinoma (BLCA)
still requires further exploration.
METHODS: Anoikis-related genes (ARGs) were retrieved from the GeneCards and
Harmonizome databases to distinguish various subtypes of BLCA and develop a
predictive model for BLCA. The immune microenvironment and enrichment pathways
between various subtypes were also analyzed using consensus clustering.
Potential medications were screened by utilizing drug sensitivity analysis. In
vitro and vivo, the character of the independent prognostic gene in BLCA was
confirmed through cell studies and mouse xenograft models.
RESULTS: One hundred thirty differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were
identified, and nine of them were chosen to construct predictive models that can
accurately forecast the prognosis of BLCA patients. K = 2 was correctly
identified as the optimal clustering type for BLCA, showing prominent
differences in survival rates between the two subgroups. The immune-related
functional studies manifested that the two subtypes' immune cell expressions
differed. It was verified that RAC3 is an independent prognostic gene for BLCA.
RAC3 shows high expression levels in BLCA, as indicated by its consistent mRNA
and protein levels across different gene expressions. The functional
verification results of RAC3 in BLCA showed that silencing RAC3 can
significantly inhibit BLCA cell proliferation, colony formation, and migration.
RAC3 knockdown inhibited the growth and migration of BLCA in vivo. SB505124
exhibited a significant inhibitory effect on the proliferation of BLCA cells.
CONCLUSION: Based on the predictive model developed in this study, BLCA
patients' prognoses can be accurately predicted. SB505124 could become an
important drug in the treatment of BLCA patients. RAC3 is essential in
prognosis, immune microenvironment, and malignant behavior of BLCA in vitro and
in vivo. It will also offer the potential for personalized treatment for BLCA
patients and generate new research avenues for clinical investigators.
BACKGROUND: Lymphedema and psychological distress, including anxiety and
depression, are common in breast cancer patients post-surgery. This study aimed
to assess the incidence and determinants of anxiety and depression in patients
with acute lymphedema (ALE) following breast cancer surgery.
METHODS: A retrospective study was conducted on 1613 breast cancer patients who
underwent surgery at Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center in 2018. ALE was
defined as lymphatic fluid accumulation causing limb swelling and was classified
by the difference in arm circumference. Anxiety and depression were evaluated
using the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS) at discharge. Descriptive
statistics and logistic regression were used to identify psychological
distress-related factors.
RESULTS: Among the 1613 patients, 363 (22.5%) had ALE. Anxiety was observed in
31% and depression in 21% of patients. ALE significantly impacted anxiety in the
multivariate analysis (OR = 1.57, 95% CI: [1.04-2.38], P = 0.033). Multivariate
analysis of ALE patients showed that longer hospital stays (OR = 0.51, 95% CI:
[0.30-0.88], P = 0.017) and invasive disease (OR = 0.39, 95% CI: [0.19-0.78], P
= 0.008) were associated with reduced anxiety; while lymph-vessel invasive
disease was associated with increased anxiety (OR = 5.97, 95% CI: [1.15-30.97],
P = 0.034). ALE had no significant impact on depression in the multivariate
analysis. However, menopause (OR = 0.72, 95% CI: [0.56-0.94], P = 0.014) and
longer hospitalization (OR = 1.30, 95% CI: [1.00-1.68], P = 0.047) influenced
depression in all patients. In the ALE group, lymph node surgery was the only
significant factor for depression (OR = 8.67, 95% CI: [1.56-48.23], P = 0.014)
in the multivariate analysis.
CONCLUSION: Psychological stress, influenced by both surgical factors and
emotional states, is associated with ALE development. Addressing both
psychological and surgical factors is crucial for improving outcomes and quality
of life in post-surgery breast cancer patients.
BACKGROUND: Relapsed and refractory Diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) can be
successfully treated with axicabtagene ciloleucel (axi-cel), a CD19-directed
autologous chimeric antigen receptor T cell (CAR-T) therapy. Diagnostic
image-based features could help identify the patients who would clinically
respond to this advanced immunotherapy.
PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to establish a radiomic image feature-based
signature derived from positron emission tomography/computed tomography
(PET/CT), including metabolic tumor burden, which can predict a durable response
to CAR-T therapy in refractory/relapsed DLBCL.
METHODS: We conducted a retrospective review of 155 patients with
relapsed/refractory DLBCL treated with axi-cel CAR-T therapy. The patients'
disease involvement was evaluated based on nodal or extranodal sites. A
sub-cohort of these patients with at least one nodal lesion (n=124) was
assessed, while an overlapping sub-cohort (n=94) had at least one extranodal
lesion. The lesion regions were characterized using 306 quantitative imaging
metrics for PET images and CT images independently. Principal component (PC)
analysis was performed to reduce the dimensionality in feature-based functional
categories: size (n=38), shape (n=9), and texture (n=259). The selected features
were used to build prediction models for survival at 1 year and tested for
prognosis to overall/progression-free survival (OS/PFS) using a Kaplan-Meier
(KM) plot.
RESULTS: The Shape-based PC features of the largest extranodal lesion on PET
were predictive of 1-year survival (AUC 0.68 [0.43,0.94]) and prognostic of
OS/PFS (p<0.018). Metabolic tumor volume (MTV) was an independent predictor with
an area under the curve (AUC) of 0.74 [0.58, 0.87]. Combining these features
improved the predictor performance (AUC of 0.78 [0.7, 0.87]). Additionally, the
Shape-based PC features were unrelated to total MTV (Spearman's ρ of 0.359, p≤
0.001).
CONCLUSION: Our study found that shape-based radiomic features on PET imaging
were predictive of treatment outcome (1-year survival) and prognostic of overall
survival. We also found non-size-based radiomic predictors that had comparable
performance to MTV and provided complementary information to improve the
predictability of treatment outcomes.
BACKGROUND: PRAME (Preferentially expressed Antigen in Melanoma) is a
cancer-testis antigen expressed in several tumor indications, representing an
attractive anticancer target. However, its intracellular location limits
targeting by traditional methods. PRAME peptides are presented on the surface of
tumor cells by human leukocyte antigen (HLA) molecules, indicating that a T cell
receptor (TCR)-based strategy that redirects T cells to kill PRAME+ tumors could
be a novel immunotherapeutic option. We confirm that PRAME protein is expressed
in cutaneous melanoma, including rare subtypes with limited treatment options,
as well as primary and metastatic lung, breast, endometrial, and ovarian tumors.
Furthermore, PRAME is expressed homogeneously across tumors with distinct
oncogenic mutations, mutation burden, PD-L1 expression, immune infiltration, and
features of immune checkpoint resistance. Immunopeptidomic analysis of primary
tumors detected HLA class I-restricted PRAME peptides.
METHODS: A TCR recognizing PRAME peptide SLLQHLIGL was engineered to high
affinity and fused to a CD3 engaging domain to create a TCRxCD3 bispecific
molecule (Immune-mobilizing monoclonal TCR Against Cancer, ImmTAC®) with the
ability to redirect polyclonal T cells to efficiently kill PRAME+ cells.
RS: The degree of T cell activation was positively correlated with peptide-HLA
abundance, with as few as 10 epitopes per cell sufficient for target cell
killing. Impaired ImmTAC®-redirected cytotoxicity of exhausted T cells was
rescued using an anti-PD-1 antibody, supporting the use of a combination
strategy to treat tumors with active PDL1-PD1 axes.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate selective and efficient T cell activation and
killing by a PRAME-directed TCRxCD3 bispecific, supporting further investigation
in multiple cancer indications.
BACKGROUND:  Azo dyes featuring one (monoazo) or several intramolecular NQN
bonds are utilized in the food, pharmaceutical, and textile industries. The food
azo dye chocolate brown HT (E155) adversely affects hepatic and renal function
upon prolonged consumption. This study aimed to assess the carcinogenic
potential of E155 in the development of mammary tumors and breast cancer.
METHODS:  A total of 20 female Long-Evans rats (eight to nine weeks old) were
randomly assigned to five groups, each consisting of four rats. The control
(female control) group received a regular diet, whereas the positive control
(female positive control) group received 7,12-dimethylbenz(a)anthracene. The
remaining three groups received 200, 400, or 600 mg/kg body weight (BW)/day E155
for 40 weeks. Tumor development, BW, and biochemical, hematological, and
histological data were monitored.
RESULTS:  BW decreased significantly with increasing dosages in the female
moderate dose (FMD) group. Blood counts indicated potential microcytic anemia
and inflammation in the treatment groups, especially in the female high-dose
(FHD) group. E155 dose-dependently impaired renal function and increased blood
creatinine and uric acid levels. Elevated serum glutamic pyruvic transaminase
(SGPT) and serum glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase levels indicate abnormal
liver function. FHD animals had more tumors and larger sizes. Higher
alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) and cancer antigen levels were detected even at low
doses. Histopathological analysis revealed that E155 causes mammary gland
fibroadenomas, ductal carcinoma in situ, and hyperplasia. It also causes
circular layer granulomas, fibrosis, and crypt abscesses in the intestines of
FMD and FHD.
CONCLUSION:  The current study suggests that prolonged exposure to E155 may
result in a higher incidence of mammary tumors, indicating an elevated risk for
the onset of breast cancer.
BACKGROUND: Cancer remains a major cause of mortality and a significant economic
burden in China. Exploring the disparities in cancer patterns and control
strategies between China and developed countries may offer valuable insights for
policy formulation and enhance cancer management efforts. This study examined
the incidence, mortality, and disability-adjusted life year (DALY) burden of
cancer in China, and compared these metrics with those observed in the United
States (US) and the United Kingdom (UK).
METHODS: Data on cancer incidence, mortality, and DALYs for China, the US, and
the UK were sourced from the GLOBOCAN 2022 online database and the Global Burden
of Disease 2021 study (GBD 2021). We utilized Joinpoint regression models to
analyze trends in cancer incidence and mortality across these countries,
calculating annual percent changes (APCs) and determining the optimal
joinpoints.
RESULTS: In 2022, China recorded around 4,824,703 new cancer cases and 2,574,176
cancer-related deaths, contributing to 71,037,170 DALYs. China exhibited a lower
cancer incidence rate compared to the US and the UK. Although cancer-related
mortality in China is slightly lower than that in the UK, it is significantly
higher than that in the US. Additionally, China experienced significantly higher
DALY rates compared to both the US and UK. The cancer landscape in China was
also undergoing significant changes, with a rapid rise in the incidence and
burden of lung, colorectal, breast, cervical, and prostate cancers. Meanwhile,
the incidence and burden of stomach cancer continued to decline. Although the
incidence of liver and esophageal cancers was decreasing, the burden of liver
cancer was increasing, while the burden of esophageal cancer remained largely
unchanged.
CONCLUSIONS: The cancer profile of China is shifting from that of a developing
country to one more typical of a developed country. The ongoing population aging
and the rise in unhealthy lifestyles are expected to further escalate the cancer
burden in China. Consequently, it is crucial for Chinese authorities to revise
the national cancer control program, drawing on successful strategies from
developed countries, while also accounting for the regional diversity in cancer
types across China.
BACKGROUND: Oncology outreach is a common strategy for addressing cancer
workforce shortages, where traveling oncologists commute across clinical
settings to extend their services. Despite its known benefits specifically for
rural patients, oncology outreach reallocates physician resources to satellite
clinics and may negatively impact the coordination of cancer care.
METHODS: In this retrospective study, we identified patients with incident
breast, colorectal, and lung cancers from 2016-2019 nationwide Medicare claims
and linked them to oncologists using Part B. We considered encounters occurring
outside the physician's primary hospital service area as "outreach visits" and
calculated the proportion of outreach visits by oncology specialty for
contiguous US hospital referral regions (HRRs) using 2016-2017 claims. We
constructed a nationwide physician patient-sharing network from 2018-2019 claims
and computed median care density-a measure of physician team familiarity-and
local transitivity-a measure of physician cohesion/clustering-for each HRR as
proxies for care coordination. Generalized linear models were used to explore
the associations between oncology outreach and care coordination measures at the
HRR level.
RESULTS: We found that HRRs with high medical oncology outreach were associated
with 16% decreases in care density (95% CI: 5-25) and 4% decreases in local
transitivity (95% CI: 1-8) compared to HRRs with low medical oncology outreach.
HRRs with high radiation and surgical oncology outreach were not associated with
network-based measures of care coordination.
CONCLUSIONS: While medical oncology outreach increases access for underserved
patient populations, it potentially fragments care delivery across clinical
settings. Health systems may consider this trade-off to inform decisions
concerning the implementation of outreach programs or policies aimed at hedging
against fragmentation in markets with active outreach arrangements.
BACKGROUND: Dural metastasis (DM) remains one of the most challenging clinical
scenarios in breast cancer treatment. To date, no clear standard care of dural
metastases has been established. We sought to identify the progression pattern
or treatment strategies that could possibly improve prognosis of breast cancer
patients with DM.
METHODS: Patients with breast cancer diagnosed with radiological confirmed dural
metastases excluding leptomeningeal invasion alone or meningeal invasion
subsequent to brain parenchyma metastases between 2014 and 2021 in single center
were reviewed. All patients underwent head-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI). Imaging information, treatment and prognostic data were recorded.
RESULTS: A total of 66 breast cancer patients were analyzed in this study, with
50 survival status including 43 deaths. Hormone receptors positive [estrogen
receptor (ER)/progesterone receptor (PR)] accounted for 43.9% of the study
cohorts followed by triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) and HER2+ subtypes
successively. Most cases (34, 51.5%) were diagnosed without parenchymal brain
metastases prior to or at time of DM diagnosis. Three morphological patterns
were determined by MRI including nodular, thickened with nodules, and diffuse
thickened types. The frontoparietal dura was the most frequently involved site,
accounting for 43.9% (29/66) of the patients, followed by temporal dura and
parietal dura, ranking second and third (21/66 and 15/66, respectively).
Fifty-four patients had extensive bone metastasis before the diagnosis of DM,
within them, the median duration from bone metastasis to the diagnosis of DM was
419 days. Forty-two patients received radiotherapy for DM, including 25 with
whole brain radiotherapy (WBRT), 4 with craniospinal axis irradiation (CSI), and
13 with DM and/or brain parenchyma lesions. Multivariate analysis indicates that
initial diagnosis age, brain metastasis status, neurological symptoms and
systemic treatment status and are significant prognostic factors (P=0.002, 0.03,
0.02, 0.001 and 0.02, respectively). The median survival time from the diagnosis
of DM was 458 days in patients who received radiotherapy compared with 225 days
in patients who did not receive radiotherapy, with a hazard ratio (HR) 0.65 [95%
confidence interval (CI): 0.302-1.305] and P value of 0.06. Leptomeningeal
invasion, parenchymal brain metastases and number of DM-involved sites were
associated with the medical decision of WBRT. There were more leptomeningeal
invasion cases distributed to WBRT group (17/29 vs. 7/37, P=0.001), and a higher
likelihood of concurrent parenchymal brain lesions (19/27 vs. 13/37, P=0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Dural metastases can occur as a subsequent event in patients with
poorly controlled extensive bone metastases, with the frontoparietal area being
the most commonly involved site. Radiotherapeutic strategy is highly influenced
by the associated metastatic volume of DM, and radiotherapy was found to improve
prognosis in these patients.
BACKGROUND: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is the most aggressive subtype
of breast cancer. Previous studies have found that fibroblast growth factor
receptor 4 (FGFR4) plays a crucial role in tumor development and metastasis.
However, the potential role and underlying mechanisms of FGFR4 in the
progression of TNBC remain unclear.
METHODS: Statistical analysis of FGFR4 expression data in public databases was
used to reveal its role in TNBC. qRT-PCR was used to detect FGFR4 expression
levels. The impact of FGFR4 level changes on TNBC cell proliferation was
assessed using CCK-8 and colony formation assays, while Transwell invasion
assays and JC-1 staining were employed to analyze the effects of FGFR4 level
changes on the invasiveness and survival capability of TNBC cells.
Differentially expressed genes were subjected to Gene Ontology, KEGG, and GSEA
enrichment analyses to identify associated signaling pathways. Additionally, Oil
Red O staining, fatty acid metabolite detection, and Western blot analysis were
used to investigate the impact of FGFR4 and its inhibitor fisogatinib, as well
as the AKT activator SC79, on the metabolic reprogramming of fatty acids in TNBC
cells.
RESULTS: FGFR4 was found to be upregulated in breast cancer and correlated with
poorer patient outcomes. Inhibition of FGFR4 resulted in reduced cell growth and
invasion in TNBC cells. It also led to increased lipid accumulation, upregulated
lipid biosynthesis-related genes, and downregulated lipolysis-related genes.
Mechanistically, FGFR4 inhibition suppressed the activation of the AKT/RYR2
signaling pathway. Reactivating the AKT pathway reversed the suppressive effects
of FGFR4 inhibition on TNBC progression.
CONCLUSION: Dysregulated FGFR4 activates the AKT/RYR2 axis, leading to tumor
proliferation, invasion, and altered lipid metabolism in TNBC. FGFR4 inhibition
could potentially serve as a novel therapeutic strategy for TNBC treatment.
BACKGROUND: Claudin-3 (CLDN3) participates in the formation of the
tight-junctions (TJs) that regulate intercellular permeability. Altered CLDN3
expression has been linked to tumor progression in multiple tumor types. Despite
its widespread expression in normal epithelial cells, CLDN3 is considered an
attractive drug target candidate, since it may be more accessible in cancer
cells than in normal cells due to their less orchestrated cell growth.
METHODS: To comprehensively determine the prevalence of CLDN3 expression in
cancer, a tissue microarray containing 14,966 samples from 133 different tumor
types and subtypes as well as 608 samples of 76 different normal tissue types
was analyzed by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: CLDN3 immunostaining was observed in 8,479 (68.9%) of 12,314 analyzable
tumors, including 11.6% with weak, 6.2% with moderate, and 51.1% with strong
positivity. CLDN3 staining was found in 96 of 133 tumor categories, 80 of which
contained at least one strongly positive case. CLDN3 positivity was most seen in
neuroendocrine neoplasms (92-100%) and in adenocarcinomas (67-100%), tumors of
the female genital tract, including various subtypes of ovarian and endometrial
carcinoma (up to 100%), as well as different subtypes of breast cancer
(95.3-100%). CLDN3 positivity was less common in squamous cell carcinomas
(0-43.2%) and mainly absent in melanoma, mesenchymal, and hematolymphatic
neoplasms. In clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC), low CLDN3 was strongly
linked to poor ISUP (p < 0.0001), Fuhrman (p < 0.0001), and Thoenes (p < 0.0001)
grades, advanced pT category (p < 0.0001), high UICC stage (p = 0.0006) and
distant metastasis (p = 0.0011), as well as shortened overall (p = 0.0118) and
recurrence-free (p < 0.0001) survival. In papillary RCC (pRCC), low CLDN3 was
associated with poor grade (p < 0.05), high pT (p = 0.0273) and distant
metastasis (p = 0.0357). In urothelial carcinoma high CLDN3 was linked to high
grade (p < 0.0001) and nodal metastasis (p = 0.0111). The level of CLDN3
staining was unrelated to parameters of tumor aggressiveness in pancreatic,
gastric, and breast cancer.
CONCLUSION: In conclusion, our data demonstrate significant levels of CLDN3
expression in many different tumor entities and identify reduced CLDN3
expression as a potential prognostic marker in RCC.
BACKGROUND: Since 2022, the Commission on Cancer (CoC) has developed three new
breast cancer quality measures (QMs): time to surgery (BCSdx) and radiation
(BCSRT) and the use of neoadjuvant therapy for triple negative and HER2/neu
positive breast cancer (BneoCT). This study assesses CoC center historical
performance for these measures and facility factors associated with low
performance.
METHODS: We examined the median number of days for time to surgery and
radiation, and the proportion of facilities that achieved an estimated
performance rate (EPR) of 70%, 80%, and 90% from 2004 to 2020 for all three
measures. Multivariable logistic regression analysis was used to determine the
association between facility factors and not achieving 80% EPR for all three
measures.
RESULTS: The median number of days to surgery and radiation in 2004 were 16 and
43, respectively, compared with 34 and 48 in 2020 (p < 0.01). For BneoCT, BCSdx,
and BCSRT measures, the proportion of facilities that attained ≥ 80% EPR was
68.5%, 72.2%, and 35.2%, respectively. The proportion of facilities that
attained ≥ 80% EPR in 2004 was 92.3% for BCSdx and 49.8% for BCSRT compared with
69.6% and 39.4%, respectively, in 2020. BneoCT performance improved over time.
Academic facilities and facilities serving a larger proportion of
socioeconomically disadvantaged patients were approximately twice as likely to
be unable to achieve compliance with all three QMs.
CONCLUSIONS: Performance levels for BCSRT are the lowest of all three measures.
Academic centers and centers with a higher proportion of Medicaid patients are
more likely to have lower adherence with all three QMs.
BACKGROUND: Tertiary lymphoid structures (TLSs) impact cancer outcomes,
including in triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), where their role in immune
modulation during neoadjuvant therapy (NAT) is underexplored.
METHODS: This study employed single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq), multiplex
immunofluorescence (mIF) staining, and radiomic techniques to evaluate TLSs and
the tumour microenvironment (TME) in TNBC patient samples before and after NAT.
RESULTS: The presence of TLSs in TNBC was associated with B-cell maturation and
T-cell activation. Compared with TLS-low TNBC, TLS-high TNBC showed
significantly greater expression of immunoglobulin family genes (IGHM and IGHG1)
in B cells and greater cytotoxicity of neoantigen-specific CD8 + T cells
(neoTCR8). Additionally, mIF revealed notable differences between TLSs and the
TME in TNBC. Although CD8 + T-cell levels do not predict the NAT response
effectively, TLS maturity strongly correlated with better NAT outcomes and
prognosis (P < 0.05). An imaging biomarker scoring system was also developed to
predict TLS status and NAT efficacy.
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrated changes in TLSs and the TME in TNBC
patients post-NAT. These findings confirm the predictive value of mature TLSs
(mTLSs) and support the use of personalised immunotherapy based on post-NAT
immune characteristics, thereby improving clinical outcomes.
BACKGROUND: For a comprehensive evaluation and due to the inconsistent results
of previous studies, we performed this meta-analysis with the aim of vitamin C
effect on breast cancer and prostate cancer and colorectal cancer.
METHODS: PubMed, Scopus and Web of Science were searched to identify studies on
the association between vitamin C and breast cancer, prostate cancer and
colorectal cancer through September 11, 2023. The pooled RR and the 95%
confidence intervals were used to measure the association between vitamin C and
breast cancer, prostate cancer and colorectal cancer by assuming a random
effects meta-analytic model. Newcastle-Ottawa scale was used for quality
appraisal.
RESULTS: A total of 69 studies were included. The pooled RR for the association
between vitamin C (dietary) and breast cancer in the cohort study was 0.99 [95%
CI: 0.95, 1.03], but the pooled RR in the case-control study was 0.72 [95% CI:
0.60, 0.85]. No association was found between vitamin E (supplemental, total
intake) and breast cancer in studies. The pooled RR for the association between
vitamin C (dietary) and prostate cancer was 0.88 [95% CI: 0.77, 1.00], which
represents a decrease in prostate cancer. No association was found between
vitamin C (supplemental) and prostate cancer in studies. The pooled RR for the
association between vitamin C (dietary) and colorectal cancer was 0.55 [95% CI:
0.42, 0.73], which represents a decrease in colorectal cancer.
CONCLUSION: Our analysis shows an inverse significant relationship between
vitamin C (dietary) and breast cancer in the case-control study. Also between
vitamin C (dietary) and prostate cancer and colorectal cancer in studies, which
represents a decrease in cancers.
BACKGROUND: This study aimed to explore the correlation between primary tumors
(PT) and paired metastatic lymph nodes (LN) and to develop a predictive model to
provide evidence for forecasting patient prognoses.
METHODS: We obtained single-cell and bulk transcriptome data from the Gene
Expression Omnibus database. Furthermore, mRNA transcriptomic data, encompassing
112 normal tissues and 1066 breast cancer samples, along with survival,
clinical, and mutation information for breast cancer patients, were acquired
from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). Employing a machine learning integration
framework incorporating ten distinct algorithms, we developed and validated a
prognostic model.
RESULTS: We constructed a prognostic model named Lymph Node Metastasis-Related
Scores (LMRS) using 26 differentially expressed genes trained on eight TCGA
datasets. Across validation sets, the model demonstrated a high C-index,
signifying its stability and effectiveness, outperforming 64 models from other
studies. Notably, cytolytic activity and T cell co-stimulation were
downregulated in the high LMRS group, alongside a downregulation of immune
cells, including B cells, CD8 + T cells, iDCs, and TILs. Similarly, most immune
checkpoints exhibited a decreasing trend with high LMRS expression. Finally, we
selected the hub biomarkers PGK1 and HSP90 for pathological verification.
Results indicated higher expression levels in PT and LN compared to normal and
benign tumors, with higher expression levels in LN than in PT.
CONCLUSION: This comprehensive analysis sheds light on gene expression
differences between PT and LN in breast cancer, culminating in the development
of a multiple-gene prognostic model with high clinical accuracy for prognosis
prediction.
BACKGROUND: Immune checkpoint inhibitors are now a part of the treatment arsenal
for triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) but refinement of PD-L1 as a prognostic
and predictive biomarker is a clinical priority. We aimed to evaluate the
relevance of novel PD-L1 immunohistochemical (IHC) thresholds in TNBC with
regard to PD-L1 gene expression, prognostic value, tumor infiltrating
lymphocytes (TILs), and TNBC molecular subtypes.
MATERIAL & METHODS: PD-L1 was scored in a tissue microarray with the SP142
(immune cell (IC) score) and the 22C3 (combined positive score; CPS) IHC assays
and TIL abundance evaluated in whole slides in a population-based cohort of 237
early-stage TNBC patients. Survival analysis was performed and RNA sequencing
data employed for molecular profiling.
RESULTS: As expected, PD-L1 positivity (IC ≥ 1% and/or CPS ≥ 1) was
significantly associated with better prognosis compared to zero PD-L1
expression. Importantly however, also patients with intermediate expression
(IC > 0%, < 1%; CPS > 0, < 1) showed a trend toward improved outcome. Tumors
with intermediate PD-L1 IHC expression also had intermediate PD-L1 (CD274) gene
expression (mRNA). Patients who were both low in TILs (< 30%) and PD-L1
(IC < 1%; CPS < 1) tended to have the poorest prognosis. PD-L1 positive tumors
clustered significantly more often as Immunomodulatory-high and Basal-Like
1-high TNBC molecular subtypes and were enriched in immune response and cell
cycle/proliferation signaling pathways. PD-L1-zero tumors on the other hand were
enriched in cell growth, differentiation, and metastatic potential pathways and
clustered more prevalently as Luminal-Androgen-Receptor-high and
Mesenchymal-high. PD-L1-intermediate tumors categorized with neither
PD-L1-positive nor PD-L1-zero tumors on the hierarchical clustering level,
consigning them as a unique subgroup.
CONCLUSION: With both SP142 and 22C3, we identified an intermediate IHC PD-L1
group within TNBCs that was supported on the molecular level. Any PD-L1 IHC
expression, even though it is < 1, tended to have positive prognostic impact. We
suggest that the generally accepted threshold of PD-L1 IHC positivity in TNBC
should be investigated further. The Swedish Cancerome Analysis Network - Breast
(SCAN-B) study was retrospectively registered 2nd Dec 2014 at
ClinicalTrials.gov; ID NCT02306096.
BACKGROUND: The efficacy and safety of cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK)4/6
inhibitors in patients with breast cancer have been investigated by large-scale
trials sponsored by drug companies. A lack of real-world evidence may lead to
biases.
OBJECTIVE: We systematically reviewed the large-scale clinical trials and
real-world data to investigate the efficacy and safety of CDK4/6 inhibitors in
patients with breast cancer.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We searched PubMed, Embase, and Cochrane Library from the
inception of each database to January 2024. We included both prospective and
retrospective studies reporting the survival outcomes or adverse effects of
CDK4/6 inhibitors in patients with breast cancer.
RESULTS: We included 41 prospective trials and 80 retrospective studies
involving a total of 69,535 patients. Our meta-analysis of double-arm studies
revealed that all types of CDK4/6 inhibitors significantly improved overall
survival and progression-free survival. The pooled estimates of the 1-year
overall survival (OS) rates and 1-year progression-free survival (PFS) rates in
single-arm real-world studies were 74.8% and 49.4% for abemaciclib, 84.1% and
55.7% for palbociclib, and 93.4% and 62.2% for ribobiclib, respectively. In
terms of adverse effects, Asian patients were significantly more likely to
experience neutropenia and increased alanine aminotransferase, whereas Western
patients were significantly more likely to have grade 3 or 4 adverse effects and
constipation.
CONCLUSIONS: CDK4/6 inhibitors can improve OS and PFS in patients with advanced
breast cancer. The incidence of adverse effects may differ with drugs and with
ethnicity. On the basis of our findings, clinicians can select suitable CDK4/6
inhibitors for patients by conducting thorough clinical evaluations.
BACKGROUND: The active coping strategies of family members can help breast
cancer patients better handle the crisis, and family adaptation is a
manifestation of the family's active coping with the crisis. In the study of
breast cancer, a disease that predominantly affects women, we explored the
influence of spouses on patients' family adaptation. This aspect has not been
explored in previous studies.
PURPOSE: In recent years, with the development of family stress coping theory,
cancer coping styles have shifted from an individual focus to a whole-family
approach. This shift has the potential to help families of cancer patients adapt
to the crisis. This study aimed to explore the correlation between dyadic
coping, family adaptation, and benefit finding in couples with breast cancer.
METHODS: Using convenience sampling, the study included 325 pairs consisting of
breast cancer patients and their spouses who attended breast surgery, oncology,
and chemotherapy sessions between April and November 2023. The survey utilized
the General Information Questionnaire for patients and spouses, the Dyadic
Coping Scale, the Benefit Finding Scale, and the Family Adaptability and
Cohesion Evaluation Scales. Data analysis was conducted using SPSS 25.0 and Amos
24.0 software.
RESULTS: In the actor effect of dyadic coping on family adaptation, the benefit
finding of patients and their spouses played a mediating role. Regarding the
partner effect (B = 0.019, 95% CI = 0.003-0.045, P < 0.05), the dyadic coping of
spouses indirectly affected the family adaptation of patients through the
benefit findings of patients. The patient's dyadic coping can directly affect
the spouse's family adaptation. The spouse's dyadic coping can influence the
patient's benefit finding.
CONCLUSION: There is a partial interaction between breast cancer patients and
their spouses' dyadic coping, benefit finding, and family adaptation. Therefore,
clinical staff should promptly identify patients and spouses with poor coping
abilities and provide them with positive psychological interventions to enhance
the dyadic coping abilities of both partners and assist them in overcoming the
problems encountered during the treatment process, ultimately helping them
better cope with family crises.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer (BC) is the prevailing malignant tumor, with its
prevalence and death rate steadily rising over time. BC often does not show
obvious symptoms in its early stages and is difficult to distinguish from benign
breast disease. We aimed to find a distinct group of miRNAs utilizing serum as a
non-invasive biomarker for early BC diagnosis.
METHODS: Herein, we mainly include the screening stage, testing stage, and
verification stage. In the screening stage, 8 miRNAs associated with BC were
selected and analyzed via literature reading, and the expression of the above
miRNAs in BC was further verified by bioinformatics and included in the research
analysis. In the testing phase, quantitative reverse transcription polymerase
chain reaction (qRT-PCR) was deployed to select the five miRNAs with the most
significant expression differences in 15 BC patients and 15 benign breast
controls to proceed to the next stage. In a subsequent validation phase, the
five miRNAs obtained from serum samples from an additional 75 BC patients and 50
benign control patients were evaluated using RT-qPCR. The diagnostic capacity,
specificity, and sensitivity of candidate miRNAs were estimated with the
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve and area under the curve (AUC).
Finally, the optimal diagnostic combination model with high sensitivity and
strong specificity was constructed by using the above 5 miRNAs.
RESULTS: The BC patients reported a significant decline in mir-10b-5p,
mir-133a-3p, mir-195-5p, and mir-155-3p levels in serum levels contrasted with
those in benign controls. Additionally, BC patients experienced elevated
mir-195-3p levels than in benign controls. We implemented ROC analysis to
evaluate its diagnostic capacity for BC. We demonstrated that all five miRNAs
had robust diagnostic capability, with an AUC above 0.8. We developed a
conclusive diagnostic combination model consisting of these 5 miRNAs in order to
enhance the diagnosis accuracy. This model demonstrated a high diagnostic value,
as shown by an AUC of 0.948.
CONCLUSION: The serum biomarker panels composed of five miRNAs identified in
this study (mir-10b-5p, mir-133a-3p, mir-195-5p, mir-195-3p, and mir-155-3p)
provide hope for early, non-invasive, and accurate diagnosis of BC.
BACKGROUND: Osteosarcoma, a highly malignant skeletal tumor, primarily affects
children and adolescents. Autophagy plays a crucial role in osteosarcoma
pathophysiology. This study utilizes bibliometric analysis to evaluate current
research on autophagy in osteosarcoma and forecast future directions.
METHODS: We conducted a comprehensive search of publications in the Web of
Science Core Collection database from January 1, 2008, to March 15, 2024. Tools
like VOSviewer, CiteSpace, R software, Excel, and Scimago were used for analysis
and visualization.
RESULTS: Publications increased steadily over 17 years, indicating rising
interest. Zhang Yuan was the most influential author, with Shanghai Jiao Tong
University leading. Cell Death & Disease was the top journal. "HMGB1 Promotes
Drug Resistance in Osteosarcoma" was the most cited paper. Co-cited articles
focused on drug resistance, therapeutic targets, autophagy in cancer, and
genomic impacts on immunotherapy. Keywords highlighted invasion, migration, cell
death, and breast cancer as research hotspots. Future studies will likely focus
on therapeutic innovations and integrated management strategies.
CONCLUSION: This bibliometric analysis offers an overview of current knowledge
and emerging trends in autophagy and osteosarcoma, emphasizing key areas like
invasion, migration, and cell death. It serves as a valuable resource for
researchers developing novel therapies for osteosarcoma.
BACKGROUND: Observational studies have shown an association between Breast
Cancer (BC) and Atrial Fibrillation (AF). However, due to confounding factors
and reverse causality, the causal role between BC and AF remains unclear. In
this study, bidirectional two-sample Mendelian randomization (MR) combined with
meta-analysis was used to evaluate the causal association between BC and AF.
METHODS: Based on the Genome-Wide Association Studies (GWAS) summary data sets,
the Inverse variance weighted (IVW) method was used as the main method, the
weighted median method and MR-Egger method were used for Bidirectional
Two-Sample Mendelian Randomization, and the Egger intercept test was used to
detect horizontal pleiotropy. Heterogeneity was tested by Cochran's Q test, and
sensitivity analysis was performed by "leave-one-out". GWAS data for AF and BC
were obtained from three separate databases (FinnGen, UKBiobank, GWAScatalog)
for European individuals. Finally, meta-analysis was performed on the MR
Analysis results from different databases.
RESULTS: The pooled IVW results showed no evidence of an effect of BC on the
risk of AF (IVW: OR = 0.9994; 95% CI = 0.9967-1.0022). There was also no
evidence of an effect of AF on BC risk (IVW: OR = 0.9970; 95%
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer (BRCA) is the most prevalent type of cancer worldwide.
As a highly heterogeneous cancer, it has a high recurrence rate. Since its
biological behavior can be regulated by immunity and cuprotosis, so exploring
potential therapeutic target to mediate immunity and cuprotosis is of great
significance for BRCA therapy.
METHODS: The immune-related genes and immune-cuprotosis-related deferentially
expressed genes (ICR-DEGs) were identified by mining the TCGA database.
Prognostic analysis, differential expression analysis, univariate and lasso
regression analyses were used to determine their independent prognostic values.
To evaluate the relationship between ICR-DEGs and immune scores, we constructed
a prognostic risk model to evaluate immune checkpoints, and then the role of
tumor immune microenvironment in BRCA was explored. Furthermore, anti-BRCA
function and mechanism of islet amyloid poly-peptide (IAPP) mediated CD8+T cells
were verified by means of flow cytometry, ELISA, and subcutaneous
transplantation tumor model.
RESULTS: All results suggested that immune-cuprotosis-related genes were a
potential predictor of BRCA's response to immune checkpoint inhibitors and
immunotherapy biomarkers. Thereby downregulation of IAPP reduced cuprotosis of
CD8+T or Her2-CAR-T cells to promote the anti-BRCA function both in vitro and in
vivo.
CONCLUSION: Our research had clarified the function and mechanism of IAPP in
CD8+T cells, providing new ideas for improving the diagnosis and treatment of
BACKGROUND: Sono-photodynamic therapy (SPDT), the combination of sonodynamic
therapy (SDT) and photodynamic therapy (PDT), is a promising tumor treatment
method. However, the hypoxic tumor microenvironment greatly compromises the
efficacy of SPDT. Pyroptosis, a new type of programmed cell death, is mainly
induced by some chemotherapeutic drugs in the current research, and rarely by
SPDT. RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) is a high-throughput sequencing technique that
comprehensively profiles the transcriptome, revealing the full spectrum of RNA
molecules in a cell. Here, we constructed IR780@O2 nanobubbles (NBs) with
photoacoustic dual response and hypoxia improvement properties to fight triple
negative breast cancer (TNBC), and demonstrated that SPDT could kill TNBC cells
through pyroptosis pathway. RNA-seq further revealed potential mechanisms and
related differentially expressed genes.
METHODS: Thin-film hydration and mechanical vibration method were utilized to
synthesize IR780@O2 NBs. Subsequently, we characterized IR780@O2 NBs and
examined the cytotoxicity as well as ROS production ability. A series of
experiments were conducted to verify that SPDT killed TNBC cells through
pyroptosis.
RESULTS: IR780@O2 NBs were successfully prepared and had certain stability.
Compared with SDT alone, SPDT increased therapeutic effect by 1.67 times by
generating more ROS, and the introduction of NBs and O2 NBs (2.23 times and 2.93
times compared with SDT alone) could further promote this process. Other
experiments proved that TNBC cells died by pyroptosis pathway. Moreover, the
in-depth mechanism revealed that colony stimulating factor (CSF) and C-X-C motif
chemokine ligand (CXCL) could be potential targets for the occurrence of
pyroptosis in TNBC cells.
CONCLUSION: The IR780@O2 NBs prepared in this study increased the degree of TNBC
cell pyroptosis through SPDT effect and alleviation of hypoxia, and cellular
senescence might be a biological process closely related to pyroptosis in TNBC.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer poses a significant health threat to women, marked by
high incidence and mortality rates. Although modern treatment primarily involves
surgery and chemotherapy, which may reduce quality of life, limited analysis
exists on the effects of traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) on this aspect. In
this paper, bibliometric software was used to study the literature related to
TCM in the treatment of breast cancer to provide researchers with new insights
and directions for development.
METHODS: By using CiteSpace and VOSviewer, we conducted an analysis of
literature on TCM in breast cancer treatment from the Web of Science Core
Collection (2013-2023). The assessment encompassed countries, institutions,
journals, authors, keywords, and references, providing a comprehensive overview
of developments in the field.
RESULTS: Analyzing 7419 articles, this study revealed an increasing trend in TCM
research on breast cancer from 2013 to 2023. China and its institutions,
particularly Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, made significant
contributions. Liu Zhishun emerged as the most prolific author, while Y.
Macpherson received the highest number of citations. The journal Evidence-Based
Complementary and Alternative Medicine received the highest number of citations.
Research primarily centers on TCM approaches for enhancing breast cancer
patients' quality of life and elucidating their underlying mechanisms.
CONCLUSION: Numerous studies have investigated TCM in treating female breast
cancer, revealing treatment trends, analyzing major research topics, currently
focusing on acupuncture, breastfeeding, and TCM, which have a greater impact on
positively ameliorating breast cancer. Influential authors and publications were
also identified. These insights provide valuable guidance for future research,
contributing to the foundation for developing effective TCM strategies for
breast cancer.
BACKGROUND: Cancer patterns in China are becoming similar to those in the United
States (US). Comparing the recent cancer profiles, trends, and determinants in
China and the US can provide useful reference data.
METHODS: This study used open-source data. We used GLOBOCAN 2022 cancer
estimates and United Nations population estimates to calculate cancer cases and
deaths in both countries during 2024. Data on cancer incidence and mortality
trends were obtained from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER)
program and National Centre for Health Statistics in the US and cancer registry
reports of the National Cancer Center (NCC) of China. Data from the Global
Burden of Disease study (GBD) and a decomposition approach were used to estimate
the contributions of four determinants to the change in cancer deaths.
RESULTS: In 2024, there are an estimated 3,246,625 and 2,510,597 new cancer
cases and 1,699,066 and 640,038 cancer deaths in China and the US, respectively.
The highest estimated cancer cases are lung cancer in China and breast cancer in
the US. The age-standardized incidence rates of lung and colorectal cancer in
the US, and stomach, liver, and esophageal cancer in China have decreased, but
the incidence rates of liver cancer in the US and colorectal cancer, prostate
cancer in men, and cervical cancer in women in China have increased. Increases
in the adult population size and population aging are main reasons for the
increase in cancer deaths; case fatality rates are a main reason for the
decrease in cancer deaths in both countries.
CONCLUSIONS: China has made progress in cancer control but lags the US.
Considering the transformation in China's pattern of cancers epidemiology, it is
imperative to develop stronger policies by adopting the cancer prevention and
control strategies used in the US to address population aging and curb growing
cancer trends.
BACKGROUND: Oncolytic adenoviruses (OAds) are the most clinically tested viral
vectors for solid tumors. However, most clinically tested "Armed" OAds show
limited antitumor effects in patients with various solid tumors even with
increased dosages and multiple injections. We developed a binary
oncolytic/helper-dependent adenovirus system (CAdVEC), in which tumors are
coinfected with an OAd and a non-replicating helper-dependent Ad (HDAd). We
recently demonstrated that a single low-dose CAdVEC expressing interleukin-12,
programmed death-ligand 1 blocker, and HSV thymidine kinase safety switch
(CAdTrio) induces significant antitumor effects in patients, including complete
response. Similar to previous OAd studies, all patients primarily amplified
Ad-specific T cells after treatment however, CAdVEC was still able to induce
clinical responses even given at a 100-fold lower dose.
METHODS: To address the mechanisms of CAdTrio-mediated antitumor effect in
patients, we analyzed patients' samples using Enzyme-linked immunosorbent spot
(ELISpot) to measure T-cell specificity and quantitative polymerase chain
reaction (qPCR) to measure CAdVEC viral genome copies at tumor sites. We then
evaluated potential mechanisms of CAdVEC efficacy in vitro using live-cell
imaging. Based on those results, we developed a new CAdVEC additionally
expressing a T-cell engager molecule targeting CD44v6 to redirect
tumor-infiltrating irrelevant T cells against cancer stem cell populations
(CAdTetra) for further improvement of local CAdVEC treatment. We tested its
efficacy against different cancer types both in vitro and in vivo including Ad
pre-immunized humanized mice.
RESULTS: We found that HDAd-infected cells escape Ad-specific T-cell recognition
with enhanced tumor-specific T-cell activity through immunomodulatory
transgenes. Since CAdVEC treatment initially amplified Ad-specific T cells in
patients, we re-direct these virus-specific T cells to target tumor cells by
additionally expressing CD44v6.BiTE from CAdTetra. CAdTetra significantly
controlled tumor growth, repolarizing local and systemic responses against
cancer cells in both immunologically "hot" and "cold" tumor models and also
induced immunologic memory against rechallenged tumors.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that CAdTetra effectively induces adaptive
T-cell responses against cancer cells by using tumor-infiltrating irrelevant T
cells.
BACKGROUND: Despite bilateral mastectomy (BLM) for early-stage breast cancer
(BC) showing no survival benefit and increased risk compared to breast
conserving surgery, some patients still choose this treatment. This study
examined whether emotion reactivity and regulation influence treatment decision
making among newly diagnosed women with breast cancer.
METHODS: Cross-sectional survey data were analyzed as part of a larger study.
Measures included the Contralateral Prophylactic Mastectomy (CPM) survey, PROMIS
Anxiety scale, and Emotion Regulation Questionnaire (ERQ) Cognitive Reappraisal
and Emotional Suppression subscales. Primary analysis included a logistic
regression model predicting treatment choice (BLM vs. non-BLM).
RESULTS: Participants (N = 137) with unilateral BC (Stages 0-III) were divided
between BLM (n = 66) versus breast conserving surgery (i.e., non-BLM, n = 71)
treatment groups. Compared to the non-BLM group, the BLM group was younger, more
likely to be partnered, and had a higher household income. Women with high
levels of BC-specific worry were 3.6 times more likely to choose BLM compared to
women with low levels of worry (OR = 3.09, 95% CI: 1.07-0.8.93). Those who used
cognitive reappraisal were 10% less likely to choose BLM compared to women who
did not use cognitive reappraisal (OR = 0.90, 95% CI: 0.82-0.99). There were no
group differences in levels of generalized anxiety (OR = 0.93, 95% CI:
0.87-0.99) or emotional suppression (OR = 1.02, 95% CI: 0.90-1.16).
CONCLUSIONS: Findings suggest the choice of BLM may be due, in part, to negative
emotional experiences after a BC diagnosis and lesser use of reappraisal to
reframe cancer-related fears. These may be important targets of intervention to
support women making BC treatment decisions.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is the world's most prevalent cancer. Although the
5-year survival rate for breast cancer in the United States is 91%, the stress
and uncertainty of survivorship can often lead to symptoms of depression and
anxiety. With nearly half of breast cancer survivors living with stress and
symptoms of depression and anxiety, there are a significant number of unmet
supportive care needs. New and potentially scalable approaches to meeting these
supportive care needs are warranted.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to engage breast cancer survivors and acceptance and
commitment therapy (ACT) content experts in user-centered design (UCD) to
develop a mobile health app (MOSAIC [Mobile Acceptance and Commitment Therapy
Stress Intervention]) using stress intervention strategies.
METHODS: We held 5 UCD sessions with 5 breast cancer survivors, 3 ACT content
experts, 2 user experience design experts, and 1 stress expert facilitator over
the course of 10 weeks. The sessions were developed to lead the 10 co-designers
through the 5-step UCD process (eg, problem identification, solution generation,
convergence, prototyping, and debriefing and evaluation). Following the fifth
session, a prototype was generated and evaluated by the 5 breast cancer
survivors and 3 ACT experts using the System Usability Scale, Acceptability
E-scale, and a brief set of semistructured interview questions.
RESULTS: The 10 co-designers were present for each of the 5 co-design sessions.
Co-designers identified 5 design characteristics: simple entry with use
reminders (behavioral nudges), a manageable number of intervention choices,
highly visual content, skill-building exercises, and social support. A total of
4 features were also identified as critical to the use of the tool: an ACT and
breast cancer-specific onboarding process, clean navigation tools, clear
organization of the interventions, and once-per-week behavioral nudges. These
requirements created the foundation for the app prototype. The 5 breast cancer
survivors and 3 ACT co-designers evaluated the app prototype for 1 week, using
an Android smartphone. They rated the app as usable (mean 79.29, SD 19.83) on
the System Usability Scale (a priori mean cutoff score=68) and acceptable (mean
24.28, SD 2.77) on the Acceptability E-scale (a priori mean cutoff score=24).
CONCLUSIONS: Through the UCD process, we created an ACT app prototype with 5
breast cancer survivors, 3 ACT experts, and 2 UCD designers. The next step in
our research is to continue the assessment and refining of the prototype with
additional breast cancer survivors. Future work will pilot-test the app to
examine the feasibility of a large-scale, randomized control trial. Studies will
enroll increasingly diverse breast cancer survivors to broaden the
generalizability of findings.
BACKGROUND: The gastrointestinal microbiota can modulate systemic estrogens,
potentially influencing estrogen-induced breast neoplasia development. This
study aimed to assess alterations in the gut microbiota in breast cancer
patients.
METHODS: A search strategy was developed using the terms: "Microbiota,"
"Gastrointestinal Microbiome," "Breast Cancer," and synonyms. Ten observational
studies were included.
RESULTS: The total sample was 1730 women (929 cases and 801 controls). The
meta-analysis of alpha diversity, assessed by the Shannon index, displayed that
in the breast cancer group, the diversity of the gut microbiota was reduced
compared to controls, with a standardized mean difference (SMD) of - 0.34 (95%
CI - 0.59, - 0.10, I2 = 68%, p = 0.007). Regarding the premenopausal population,
there was a significant reduction in the breast cancer group (SMD - 0.67, 95% CI
- 1.06, - 0.28, I2 = 77%, p = 0.0009). In women with a body mass index (BMI)
between overweight or obesity, no statistically significant difference was
observed (SMD - 0.20; 95% CI - 0.51, 0.11; I2 52%, p = 0.20). However, in women
with a BMI greater than or equal to 18.5 and less than 25.0, there was lower
diversity in women with breast cancer compared to controls (SMD - 0.49, 95% CI
- 0.94, - 0.04; I2 78%, p = 0.03).
CONCLUSIONS: The study found a significant difference in gut microbiota
diversity between women with breast cancer and controls, supporting the growing
evidence that the gut microbiota may play a role in mammary carcinogenesis.
BACKGROUND: Novel systemic anticancer therapies (SACT) in the form of targeted
and immunotherapies are increasingly replacing traditional chemotherapy. Little
is known about the impact of novel SACT on healthcare resource utilization
(HCRU) at the end of life.
METHODOLOGY: A retrospective review of patients attending a tertiary cancer
center in Toronto, Canada, with advanced solid or hematological malignancies who
died in 2019. Demographic and cancer data, SACT use, HCRU (emergency room [ER]
visits, acute/intensive care unit [ICU] admission, and place of death) were
retrieved and compared between those who received SACT in their last 30 days of
life and those who did not. Chi-squared tests or Quasi-Poisson regression
calculated HCRU expressed as percentages or rate ratios (RR). Univariate and
multivariable logistic regression identified factors independently associated
with SACT use.
RESULTS: Of 443 patients included, 88 (20%) received SACT in the last 30 days of
life, with 42 (48%) receiving targeted therapies and 10 (11%) immunotherapy.
Factors associated with SACT use included younger age (p = 0.016), breast
(p < 0.001), lung (p = 0.047), hematological malignancies (p = 0.002), fewer
comorbidities (p = 0.039), and novel SACT (p = 0.006). Receipt of SACT was
associated with a higher frequency of ER visits (55% vs. 36% who did not receive
SACT, p = 0.001), acute hospitalizations (68% vs. 47%, p < 0.001), ICU
admissions (18% vs. 7%, p = 0.003), and death in hospital (45% vs. 30%,
p = 0.008).
CONCLUSION: Novel SACT use at the end of life is high and is strongly associated
with HCRU. Future studies should explore the impact of advance care planning and
palliative care referrals on SACT use.
BACKGROUND: Anti-estrogens have had limited impact on breast cancer (BC)
prevention. Novel agents with better tolerability, and efficacy beyond estrogen
receptor (ER) positive BC are needed. We studied licochalcone A (LicA) for
ER-agnostic BC prevention.
METHODS: We evaluated antiproliferative effects of LicA in seven breast cell
lines and its suppression of ER+ and ER- xenograft tumors in mice. High-risk
human breast tissue was treated with LicA ex vivo , followed by RNA sequencing
and metabolism flux modeling. Confirmatory testing was performed in an
independent specimen set and ER+/- BC cell lines using NanoString metabolic
panel, proteomics, western blots, and spatiotemporally resolved cholesterol
quantification in single cells.
RESULTS: LicA suppressed proliferation in vitro and xenograft tumor growth in
vivo . It downregulated pivotal steps in PI3K-AKT-SREBP1-dependent lipogenesis,
suppressed PI3K and AKT phosphorylation, SREBP1 protein expression, and
cholesterol levels in the plasma membrane inner leaflet, to the levels in normal
breast cells. LicA also suppressed prostaglandin E2 synthesis and
PRPS1-catalyzed de novo nucleotide biosynthesis, stalling proliferation; further
evident by reduced MKI67 and BCL2 proteins.
CONCLUSIONS: LicA targets SREBP1, a central regulator of lipogenesis and immune
response, reducing pro-tumorigenic aberrations in lipid homeostasis and
inflammation. It is a promising non-endocrine candidate for BC prevention.
BACKGROUND: Women with obesity and/or type-II-diabetes have an increased breast
cancer risk, increased metastasis, and poorer prognosis, especially after
menopause. In a rat model of high-fat-diet and menopause-induced weight gain, we
previously reported that treatment with the anti-diabetic drug metformin for
8-weeks after ovariectomy (OVX; modeling menopause) reduced growth of existing
mammary tumors and inhibited new tumor formation. This identified the menopause
transition as a potential window-of-opportunity for interventions to decrease
obesity-associated breast cancer incidence and disease progression. Here, we
extend these findings to determine if limiting metformin to the peak window of
OVX-induced weight gain would have similar anti-cancer effects.
FINDINGS: Metformin during the first four weeks following OVX is critical to
reducing tumor burden, as rats treated with metformin early (weeks0-4-postOVX)
had reduced tumor burden. Conversely, initiating metformin later in the postOVX
period (weeks 4-8postOVX) did not reduce cancer burden. Despite improved tumor
outcomes, metformin withdrawal after the early postOVX time had detrimental
metabolic effects, including weight gain and increased adiposity, insulin, IGF1,
and HOMA-IR, which correlate with increased cancer risk.
CONCLUSIONS: These data reveal early-postmenopause as a critical window when
metformin decreases progression of existing disease and highlights the
importance of maintaining treatment to prevent metabolic dysregulation, which
could promote secondary tumors/metastasis. These findings also help explain the
disconnect between epidemiological studies reporting anticancer benefits of
metformin and more recent clinical trials that failed to see similar efficacy,
potentially due to issues of timing and/or inclusion of women outside the early
postmenopausal window and/or without underlying metabolic dysfunction.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer remains a leading cause of mortality among women
worldwide, emphasizing the urgent need for innovative prognostic tools to
improve treatment strategies. Anoikis, a form of programmed cell death critical
in preventing metastasis, plays a pivotal role in breast cancer progression.
METHODS: This study introduces the Artificial Intelligence-Derived Anoikis
Signature (AIDAS), a novel machine learning-based prognostic tool that
identifies key anoikis-related gene patterns in breast cancer. AIDAS was
developed using multi-cohort transcriptomic data and validated through
immunohistochemistry assays on clinical samples to ensure robustness and broad
applicability.
RESULTS: AIDAS outperformed existing prognostic models in accurately predicting
breast cancer outcomes, providing a reliable tool for personalized treatment.
Patients with low AIDAS levels were found to be more responsive to
immunotherapies, including PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitors, while high-AIDAS patients
demonstrated greater susceptibility to specific chemotherapeutic agents, such as
methotrexate.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings highlight the critical role of anoikis in breast
cancer prognosis and underscore AIDAS's potential to guide individualized
treatment strategies. By integrating machine learning with biological insights,
AIDAS offers a promising approach for advancing personalized oncology. Its
detailed understanding of the anoikis landscape paves the way for the
development of targeted therapies, promising significant improvements in patient
outcomes.
BACKGROUND: In this review, the complicated landscape of breast cancer
management is explored with a focus on the promising synergies between
ribociclib and endocrine therapy. Ribociclib mainly acts as a cyclin-dependent
kinase 4/6 (CDK4/6) inhibitor, which disrupts cell cycle progression necessary
for tumor growth. This, in combination with endocrine therapy, aims to produce
hormone receptor-positive breast cancers, which is a very relevant subtype with
challenging therapeutics.
METHODS: A comprehensive review was conducted using multiple databases, PubMed,
Embase, Scopus, Cochrane Library, and Web of Science, covering the period from
January 1990 to May 2024.
RESULTS: Pharmacokinetic studies underscore the efficacy and tolerability of
ribociclib, thus providing vital information for dose adjustments, particularly
among patients with renal and hepatic impairments. Ribociclib's value in
extending progression-free survival and improving overall survival has been
shown by clinical trials such as the MONALEESA series. Quality of life
considerations and patient-reported outcomes from these trials indicate that
ribociclib has a broader effect on the well-being of the patients. However,
despite the success experienced by this drug in clinical practice, it still has
some side effects, including hematologic toxicity, hepatotoxicity, and
thromboembolism associated with it. Ribociclib resistance mechanisms are
multifaceted mixtures comprising genetic variations or mutations, compensatory
signaling pathways, and epigenomic changes. While overcoming resistance remains
challenging, ongoing research seeks to reconcile.
CONCLUSION: Ribociclib combined with endocrine therapy represents a significant
advancement in breast cancer treatment, albeit with challenges that necessitate
ongoing research and holistic patient care approaches.
BACKGROUND: Arm morbidity and postoperative complications following sentinel
lymph node biopsy (SLNB) or axillary lymph node dissection (ALND) are common
problems in patients with breast cancer. The de-escalating axillary surgery is
increasing; however, there is a lack of patients with suspicious nodes. This
study aimed to reduce the need for SLNB in suspicious lymph node cases.
METHODS: A prospective cohort study of women with invasive breast cancer who
underwent surgery between January 2021 and December 2022. The study included two
cohorts: Cohort A comprised patients with stage cT1-2N0-1M0 cancer who planned
upfront surgery, while Cohort B included patients with stages cT1-4N2M0,
cT3-4N1M0, or cT1-2N0-1M0 who received neoadjuvant systemic treatment. During
the study, a clip was inserted into the suspicious lymph node on imaging to
determine whether it could serve as a sentinel node and potentially replace SLNB
or reduce the need for axillary surgery.
RESULT: In cohort A, 22 surgeries were performed, while in cohort B, seven
surgeries were performed. The median follow-up time was 15 months. In cohort A,
71% of the patients had cN0 disease, while 28% had cN1 disease. A suspicious
node correlated to a sentinel node was noted in 66.67% of cohort A. The
false-negative rate (FNR) was 14.28%. However, when the clip node removal
procedure was performed instead of the sentinel node procedure, the FNR was 10%.
CONCLUSION: In early breast cancer, suspicious nodes in imaging studies could
not currently represent sentinel lymph nodes, and the FNR was still high.
Nevertheless, more studies with larger populations will provide a better
understanding due to the limited number of patients.
BACKGROUND: Advanced bilateral breast cancers with local and regional nodal
involvement are rare and challenging to plan due to conflicting demands of
conformality, uniformity and sparing of organs at risk such as heart and lungs.
Pencil beam scanning (PBS) protons have been shown to provide improved organ at
risk (OAR) sparing, conformality and homogeneity compared to photon techniques
including three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy, intensity modulated
radiation therapy (IMRT), volumetric arc therapy (VMAT), and tomotherapy. We
performed a blinded comparison between VMAT and PBS plans and extend this
comparison with a case study of a patient win expander in situ during
radiotherapy.
METHODS: In this case-controlled study, five bilateral breast patients' clinical
proton plan datasets were anonymized and replanned using VMAT. Additionally, for
one patient with bilateral expanders, we compared two PBS planning techniques
that are used clinically.
RESULTS: For the similar target volume coverage, significant differences were
found for heart and lung sparing, particularly for lower isodoses. For instance,
mean lung V5 was 96.7% vs. 39% for VMAT vs. PBS and mean heart dose was 11.4 vs.
0.69 Gy (RBE) for VMAT vs. protons. The expander patient's plan did not differ
significantly from whole breast or chest wall patients in terms of coverage or
in gains from PBS compared to VMAT. For example, for comparable homogeneity
indexes (HIs) of 1.2 (VMAT) and 1.1 (PBS), the mean heart dose is 11 vs. 1 Gy.
The gains from PBS are approximately a factor of 10 compared to a factor of <2
for estimated gains to VMAT plans using deep inspiration breath hold (DIBH)
described in the literature.
CONCLUSIONS: PBS provides better sparing of heart and lungs compared to VMAT in
whole breast, chest wall and expander patients. Further study with more patients
is required to validate these conclusions.
BACKGROUND: Cyclin-dependent kinase 4 and 6 inhibitors (CDK4/6i) have improved
the efficacy of endocrine therapy in hormone receptor-positive (HR+)/human
epidermal growth factor receptor 2-negative (HER2-) breast cancer (BC) and are
now used in both early-stage and metastatic disease. Recent case reports suggest
that pseudo-serum creatinine (Scr) elevations are likely a class effect of
CDK4/6i.
METHODS: This single-center retrospective analysis included patients aged ≥18
years who received at least one dose of palbociclib, ribociclib, or abemaciclib
for the treatment of HR+/HER2- BC in the early or advanced setting. The primary
objective was the incidence of pseudo-Scr elevation for each of the three
agents. CDK4/6i-induced pseudo-Scr elevation was suspected when the Scr
elevation could not be fully attributed to other causes. Secondary endpoints
included the grade, onset, duration, and clinical consequences of pseudo-Scr
elevation.
RESULTS: 143 patients were included. Pseudo-Scr elevation was suspected in
patients treated with palbociclib, ribociclib, or abemaciclib, with incidences
of 16% (8/50), 14% (6/43), and 20% (10/50), respectively. Rates did not
significantly differ between agents (p = 0.727). Among patients with
CDK4/6i-induced pseudo-Scr elevation, all events were grade 1 (8.3%) or 2
(91.7%). The median onset from treatment initiation to first Scr elevation was
33.5, 42, and 21.5 days, for palbociclib, ribociclib, or abemaciclib,
respectively.
CONCLUSION: Pseudo-Scr elevation appears to be a class effect of CDK4/6i, with
similar rates of Scr elevation observed across the three agents currently FDA
approved.
BACKGROUND: Standard treatment for bone metastases is based on bisphosphonates
such as zoledronic acid. The objective of this study was to evaluate the
incidence of acute renal failure during treatment with Zoledronate and to
analyze its correlated factors.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This is a retrospective study carried out at the medical
oncology department of Habib Bourguiba University Hospital in Sfax, between
January 2022 and March 2022. The creatinine dosage was carried out using the
Jaffe-type colorimetric method. Acute renal failure was defined by the Kidney
disease Improving Global Outcomes criteria.
RESULTS: 48 patients were included. The average age was 56.9 ± 10.7 years with a
sex ratio (M/F) equal to 0.5. The average weight of the patients was equal to
68.5 ± 16.4 kg. 62.5% of patients were followed for breast cancer, 12.5% had
lung cancer and 12.5% had prostate adenocarcinoma. The mean serum creatinine
before the start of treatment was equal to 74.3 ± 34.3 µmol/l 50.84 ± 0.11
mg/dl). The mean pre-therapeutic clearance was 94.1 ± 40.2 ml/min with 4 cases
of moderate renal impairment (8.3%). Acute renal failure according to KDIGO
during treatment with Zoledronic acid was observed in 9 cases (18.8%), thus
requiring a dose reduction. Acute renal failure was significantly associated
initial clearance <60 ml/min and low weight of 53.44 kg (p = 0.003 and p = 0.01
respectively), in multivariate analysis.
CONCLUSION: Our study concluded that factors associated with acute renal failure
were low weight and clearance less than 60 ml/min.
BACKGROUND: Paclitaxel (PTX) has been used as a chemotherapeutic agent for
several malignancies, including breast cancer, and efforts to increase the
efficiency of PTX are continuous. Previous studies have shown that the
voltage-gated K+ channels are over-expressed in breast cancer cell lines;
therefore, blocking this type of K+ channel reduces cell proliferation and
viability.
AIMS: In this study, FDA-approved 4-aminopyridine (4-AP), a voltage-gated
potassium channel blocker, was used in combination with PTX to improve the
anticancer activity of PTX in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cell lines.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Viability was determined with trypan blue, a clonogenic
assay was performed, and the cell cycle was determined with a flow cytometer and
immunochemistry. To gain an insight into the mechanism, intracellular K+
concentration, intracellular Ca2+ (calcium) concentration, and transmembrane
potential measurements were made with corresponding fluorescent dyes. The
apoptotic cell number was determined using Annexin /PI method by flow cytometer.
Viability decreased with combination therapy and the clonogenic assay proved
decreased colony formation. The apoptotic cell number was increased after
treatment with the combination in both cell lines. Cell cycle measurements
showed G1 arrest for both MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cell lines upon 4-AP treatment.
PTX caused G1 arrest in MCF-7 cells and S phase arrest in MDA-MB-231 cells.
Combination treatment caused S phase arrest in MCF-7 cells and S phase and G2/M
phase arrest in MDA-MB-231 cells. Intracellular K+ concentration was increased
after all treatments in both cell lines. Ca2+ concentration was increased
significantly after combination treatment. Depolarization in the transmembrane
potential was observed after all treatments in both cell lines.
CONCLUSION: Biophysical parameters like the transmembrane potential and ion
fluxes have been defined in cancer progression which can provide new aspects for
cancer treatments. This study shows that the combination of 4-AP with PTX is a
promising alternative the mechanism of which needs further investigation
considering the results obtained for Ca2+, K+, and membrane potential.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer-related lymphedema (BCRL) is a chronic complication of
breast cancer that requires long-term management. This condition imposes
significant disturbance on breast cancer survivors (BCSs) physically,
emotionally, and, financially. The purpose of this study was to approach the
financial burden of BCRL in Iran.
METHODS: This qualitative study was performed based on the standards for
reporting qualitative research (SRQR) guidelines. Semi-structured and in-depth
interviews were conducted using a voice recorder. Data analysis was performed
based on the content analysis method of Graneheim and Lundman. Nine women with
BCRL participated in the study.
RESULTS: Three major themes were generated based on the captured data: (1)
direct costs related to BCRL management, (2) indirect costs imposed by BCRL at
work or home, and, (3) benefits of costs which was a great concern of BCSs that
how much these costs eventually make their condition better. High costs of
garments, lack of insurance coverage, and, difficulties in accessing lymphedema
care were among the frequently mentioned problems by BCSs with BCRL.
CONCLUSION: The financial burden of BCRL is significant on BCSs in Iran. The
establishment of insurance coverage policies, easier access to health services,
and, implanting patient-centered measures in evidence-based lymphedema
guidelines, could be proper interventions to lower the financial burden of BCRL.
BACKGROUND: Wire-guided localization (WGL) for non-palpable breast cancer
lesions has drawbacks like wire migration, localization difficulties, and
logistical challenges. Wireless methods, such as reflector-guided localization
(RGL), address these issues and are compatible with breast MRI. This study
evaluates the organizational and cost impacts of RGL compared to WGL.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Our retrospective study compared the organizational
impacts and costs of RGL and WGL at a university hospital. Quantitative and
qualitative assessments included operating time and a questionnaire for surgeons
and radiologists. Cost analysis covered device costs.
RESULTS: The study involved 60 patients (30 with RGL and 30 with WGL). The RGL
group had a significantly longer duration between device insertion and surgery
(3.73 ± 5.5 days) compared to the WGL group (same day or day before surgery).
The WGL group required more devices whereas cost were higher for RGL. Health
professionals reported a major positive impact of RGL on healthcare processes
and safety, with minor negative impact on training.
CONCLUSIONS: RGL offers flexible scheduling by decoupling radiology and surgery
but is limited by high costs. Further data is needed to identify ideal
candidates, assess patient satisfaction, and evaluate its long-term benefits in
breast cancer care.
BACKGROUND: Ultrasound (US) is a medical imaging modality that plays a crucial
role in the early detection of breast cancer. The emergence of numerous deep
learning systems has offered promising avenues for the segmentation and
classification of breast cancer tumors in US images. However, challenges such as
the absence of data standardization, the exclusion of non-tumor images during
training, and the narrow view of single-task methodologies have hindered the
practical applicability of these systems, often resulting in biased outcomes.
This study aims to explore the potential of multi-task systems in enhancing the
detection of breast cancer lesions.
METHODS: To address these limitations, our research introduces an end-to-end
multi-task framework designed to leverage the inherent correlations between
breast cancer lesion classification and segmentation tasks. Additionally, a
comprehensive analysis of a widely utilized public breast cancer ultrasound
dataset named BUSI was carried out, identifying its irregularities and devising
an algorithm tailored for detecting duplicated images in it.
RESULTS: Experiments are conducted utilizing the curated dataset to minimize
potential biases in outcomes. Our multi-task framework exhibits superior
performance in breast cancer respecting single-task approaches, achieving
improvements close to 15% in segmentation and classification. Moreover, a
comparative analysis against the state-of-the-art reveals statistically
significant enhancements across both tasks.
CONCLUSION: The experimental findings underscore the efficacy of multi-task
techniques, showcasing better generalization capabilities when considering all
image types: benign, malignant, and non-tumor images. Consequently, our
methodology represents an advance towards more general architectures with real
clinical applications in the breast cancer field.
BACKGROUND: Interleukin-2 (IL-2) is a well-known cytokine that plays a crucial
role in stimulating immune cells, including natural killer (NK) cells and
cytotoxic T cells. It has been studied as an immunotherapy for a variety of
diseases, including cancer. However, due to its short serum half-life, high
doses of IL-2 are required which can result in systemic toxicities like
capillary leak syndrome.
OBJECTIVE: To demonstrate the enhanced antitumor efficacy of Albumin Binding
Domain-conjugated IL-2 (ABD-IL-2) at a lower dose compared to IL-2.
METHODS: IL-2 and ABD-IL-2 were purified using Ni-NTA resin with a histidine
sequence added to their C-terminal region for purification purpose. Peripheral
blood lymphocytes were stimulated with IL-2 and ABD-IL-2 to assess their
function. 4T1 cells were injected into BALB/c mice to establish a breast cancer
model with metastasis evaluated in the lungs.
RESULTS: Both recombinant proteins significantly stimulated T lymphocyte
proliferation compared to the negative control (P=0.000, P=0.001).
Administration of both proteins reduced the size of isolated tumors in the
breast cancer mouse model. The control group had more nodules and larger lung
metastatic centers (P=0.000). Metastasis to secondary lymphoid organs occurred
only in the control group.
CONCLUSION: By using ABD-IL-2 at a one-third concentration compared to IL-2, we
aimed to reduce administration toxicity associated with high doses of IL-2 in
immunotherapy. This approach shows potential for improving IL-2-based treatments
while minimizing adverse effects.
BACKGROUND: Sexual concerns are common and problematic for breast cancer
survivors. Partner and relationship factors often play a key role in determining
survivors' sexual adjustment, making it likely that couple-based interventions
that integrate survivors' partners could be especially promising for addressing
survivors' sexual concerns. Yet few such interventions have been tested. The
objective of this study was to evaluate the efficacy of the Intimacy Enhancement
(IE) intervention, a four-session, couple-based intervention addressing breast
cancer survivors' sexual concerns by telephone in a randomized controlled trial.
METHODS: Female posttreatment breast cancer survivors reporting sexual concerns
and their intimate partners (N = 120 couples; 240 participants) were randomized
either to the IE intervention or to Living Healthy Together (LHT), an active
control intervention of equivalent length. Outcomes (measured at baseline,
postintervention, and at 3 and 6 months postintervention) included breast cancer
survivors' sexual function (primary), partners' sexual function (secondary), and
survivors' and partners' psychosocial and relationship outcomes (secondary).
Mixed linear regression models examined intervention effects on outcomes at all
follow-ups.
RESULTS: Model-based estimates of intervention effects showed greater
improvements in survivors' overall sexual function, sexual satisfaction,
arousal, lubrication, and orgasm at postintervention (p < .05). Effects on
survivors' 3-month and 6-month sexual functioning or other secondary outcomes
were minimal. Most couples completed all IE sessions (97%) and LHT (92%), and
satisfaction ratings were high.
CONCLUSIONS: Compared with an active control intervention, the IE intervention
had significant short-term benefits for survivors' sexual function. Efforts may
be needed to increase the longevity of the positive effects, such as more
frequent or adjunctive treatments.
BACKGROUND: Total thyroidectomy (TT) is usually recommended for unilateral
papillary thyroid cancer (PTC) with lateral lymph node metastasis (LLNM), but no
significant improvement in recurrence-free survival (RFS) is seen upon
treatment. As an initial surgery, lobectomy may have advantages in appropriately
selected unilateral PTC with ipsilateral LLNM.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to explore the feasibility of lobectomy for selected
unilateral PTC with ipsilateral LLNM.
METHODS: From January 2014 to December 2021, we retrospectively reviewed
patients with PTC and LLNM who were treated at our center. Patients
preoperatively diagnosed with unilateral PTC and ipsilateral LLNM were
recruited. Overall, 102 patients who chose lobectomy as their initial surgery
were included in the lobectomy group and 96 patients who chose TT were included
in the control group, defined as the TT group.
RESULTS: The mean follow-up time of the lobectomy group was 47.5 ± 22.2 months.
Patients in the lobectomy group had a significantly lower rate of
hypoparathyroidism than those in the TT group (0% vs. 11.5%; p < 0.001). RFS
after lobectomy was comparable with that after TT according to Kaplan-Meier
curve analysis (log-rank p = 0.80). Lobectomy achieved a significantly lower
incidence of unsatisfactory TSH control than TT (5.9% vs. 20.8%; p = 0.006).
CONCLUSIONS: Lobectomy may be an appropriate initial therapy for selected
unilateral PTC with ipsilateral LLNM. A randomized prospective study with
long-term follow-up is warranted.
BACKGROUND: The Global Burden of Diseases, Injuries, and Risk Factors Study
(GBD) 2021 provides a comprehensive assessment of health and risk factor trends
at global, regional, national, and subnational levels. This study aims to
examine the burden of diseases, injuries, and risk factors in the USA and
highlight the disparities in health outcomes across different states.
METHODS: GBD 2021 analysed trends in mortality, morbidity, and disability for
371 diseases and injuries and 88 risk factors in the USA between 1990 and 2021.
We used several metrics to report sources of health and health loss related to
specific diseases, injuries, and risk factors. GBD 2021 methods accounted for
differences in data sources and biases. The analysis of levels and trends for
causes and risk factors within the same computational framework enabled
comparisons across states, years, age groups, and sex. GBD 2021 estimated years
lived with disability (YLDs) and disability-adjusted life-years (DALYs; the sum
of years of life lost to premature mortality and YLDs) for 371 diseases and
injuries, years of life lost (YLLs) and mortality for 288 causes of death, and
life expectancy and healthy life expectancy (HALE). We provided estimates for 88
risk factors in relation to 155 health outcomes for 631 risk-outcome pairs and
produced risk-specific estimates of summary exposure value, relative health
risk, population attributable fraction, and risk-attributable burden measured in
DALYs and deaths. Estimates were produced by sex (male and female), age (25 age
groups from birth to ≥95 years), and year (annually between 1990 and 2021). 95%
uncertainty intervals (UIs) were generated for all final estimates as the 2·5th
and 97·5th percentiles values of 500 draws (ie, 500 random samples from the
estimate's distribution). Uncertainty was propagated at each step of the
estimation process.
FINDINGS: We found disparities in health outcomes and risk factors across US
states. Our analysis of GBD 2021 highlighted the relative decline in life
expectancy and HALE compared with other countries, as well as the impact of
COVID-19 during the first 2 years of the pandemic. We found a decline in the
USA's ranking of life expectancy from 1990 to 2021: in 1990, the USA ranked 35th
of 204 countries and territories for males and 19th for females, but dropped to
46th for males and 47th for females in 2021. When comparing life expectancy in
the best-performing and worst-performing US states against all 203 other
countries and territories (excluding the USA as a whole), Hawaii (the
best-ranked state in 1990 and 2021) dropped from sixth-highest life expectancy
in the world for males and fourth for females in 1990 to 28th for males and 22nd
for females in 2021. The worst-ranked state in 2021 ranked 107th for males
(Mississippi) and 99th for females (West Virginia). 14 US states lost life
expectancy over the study period, with West Virginia experiencing the greatest
loss (2·7 years between 1990 and 2021). HALE ranking declines were even greater;
in 1990, the USA was ranked 42nd for males and 32nd for females but dropped to
69th for males and 76th for females in 2021. When comparing HALE in the
best-performing and worst-performing US states against all 203 other countries
and territories, Hawaii ranked 14th highest HALE for males and fifth for females
in 1990, dropping to 39th for males and 34th for females in 2021. In 2021, West
Virginia-the lowest-ranked state that year-ranked 141st for males and 137th for
females. Nationally, age-standardised mortality rates declined between 1990 and
2021 for many leading causes of death, most notably for ischaemic heart disease
(56·1% [95% UI 55·1-57·2] decline), lung cancer (41·9% [39·7-44·6]), and breast
cancer (40·9% [38·7-43·7]). Over the same period, age-standardised mortality
rates increased for other causes, particularly drug use disorders (878·0%
[770·1-1015·5]), chronic kidney disease (158·3% [149·6-167·9]), and falls (89·7%
[79·8-95·8]). We found substantial variation in mortality rates between states,
with Hawaii having the lowest age-standardised mortality rate (433·2 per 100 000
[380·6-493·4]) in 2021 and Mississippi having the highest (867·5 per 100 000
[772·6-975·7]). Hawaii had the lowest age-standardised mortality rates
throughout the study period, whereas Washington, DC, experienced the most
improvement (a 40·7% decline [33·2-47·3]). Only six countries had
age-standardised rates of YLDs higher than the USA in 2021: Afghanistan,
Lesotho, Liberia, Mozambique, South Africa, and the Central African Republic,
largely because the impact of musculoskeletal disorders, mental disorders, and
substance use disorders on age-standardised disability rates in the USA is so
large. At the state level, eight US states had higher age-standardised YLD rates
than any country in the world: West Virginia, Kentucky, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania,
New Mexico, Ohio, Tennessee, and Arizona. Low back pain was the leading cause of
YLDs in the USA in 1990 and 2021, although the age-standardised rate declined by
7·9% (1·8-13·0) from 1990. Depressive disorders (56·0% increase [48·2-64·3]) and
drug use disorders (287·6% [247·9-329·8]) were the second-leading and
third-leading causes of age-standardised YLDs in 2021. For females, mental
health disorders had the highest age-standardised YLD rate, with an increase of
59·8% (50·6-68·5) between 1990 and 2021. Hawaii had the lowest age-standardised
rates of YLDs for all sexes combined (12 085·3 per 100 000 [9090·8-15 557·1]),
whereas West Virginia had the highest (14 832·9 per 100 000
[11 226·9-18 882·5]). At the national level, the leading GBD Level 2 risk
factors for death for all sexes combined in 2021 were high systolic blood
pressure, high fasting plasma glucose, and tobacco use. From 1990 to 2021, the
age-standardised mortality rates attributable to high systolic blood pressure
decreased by 47·8% (43·4-52·5) and for tobacco use by 5·1% (48·3%-54·1%), but
rates increased for high fasting plasma glucose by 9·3% (0·4-18·7). The burden
attributable to risk factors varied by age and sex. For example, for ages 15-49
years, the leading risk factors for death were drug use, high alcohol use, and
dietary risks. By comparison, for ages 50-69 years, tobacco was the leading risk
factor for death, followed by dietary risks and high BMI.
INTERPRETATION: GBD 2021 provides valuable information for policy makers,
health-care professionals, and researchers in the USA at the national and state
levels to prioritise interventions, allocate resources effectively, and assess
the effects of health policies and programmes. By addressing socioeconomic
determinants, risk behaviours, environmental influences, and health disparities
among minority populations, the USA can work towards improving health outcomes
so that people can live longer and healthier lives.
FUNDING: Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation.
BACKGROUND: There is a lack of research on whether COVID-19 disruptions in
breast cancer screening, diagnosis, and treatment affected mortality rates over
time.
METHOD: This ecological time series study, covering the period between 2013 and
2023, utilizes the inflection point regression model and calculates the Annual
Percentage Change (APC). The study used open-access data from the Brazilian
Mortality Information System. The dependent variables measured were mortality
rates due to breast cancer as an underlying cause and contributing cause in
women aged 20 and over. The double exponential smoothing method was applied to
predict mortality rates for 2020-2023.
RESULTS: During the study period, the mortality rate due to breast cancer as a
contributing cause increased approximately tenfold compared to mortality as an
underlying cause (APC 6.9 % vs. 0.7 %). On average, 12 % of breast
cancer-related deaths were attributed to the disease as a contributing cause.
Breast cancer deaths as an underlying cause declined in 2020 and 2021, remaining
below the 95 % predicted interval (95 % PI), but showed recovery until 2023.
Mortality due to breast cancer as a contributing cause increased early in the
pandemic, with deaths related to COVID-19 as an underlying cause comprising
39.6 % of cases in 2021. Breast cancer-related deaths, both as an underlying and
contributing cause, showed an upward trend until 2021 and remained within the
95 % PI until 2023.
CONCLUSION: During the pandemic, deaths due to breast cancer as an underlying
cause decreased while contributing deaths increased, with total mortality
remaining within the predicted range.
BACKGROUND: Acoustic cavitation is a foundational mechanism in ultrasound
therapy, primarily through inertial cavitation resulting from microbubble
collapse. Sonodynamic therapy, with inertial acoustic cavitation threshold and
low-dose radiation in the presence of sensitizers, may provide significant
effects for cancer treatment, potentially overcoming resistance encountered with
single therapies.
METHODS: MCF7 breast cancer cells were subjected to sonodynamic therapy either
alone or combined with ionizing radiation, gold nanoparticles coated with
apigenin, and methylene blue. Several parameters were evaluated, including
reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation and colonization. Additionally, the
investigation included assessing the long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) PTV1 with
miRNA1204 and related genes using Real-Time PCR.
RESULTS: Sonodynamic therapy at a mechanical index of 0.31 as acoustic
cavitation threshold increased intracellular ROS. Combining sonodynamic therapy
and 2Gy X-ray radiation with methylene blue and gold nanoparticles coated with
apigenin significantly decreased plating efficiency (4.44±1.69), and survival
fraction (2.75±1.98) compared with control (Ctrl.) (98.77±4.49) and (97.59±
2.94), respectively. This was associated with a marked increase in ROS with a
mean fluorescence intensity of 20576.2 ± 4.6 (>4.5 times). The combined
treatment also increased p53 expression and decreased the expression of PVT1,
miR-1204, and related genes.
CONCLUSION: Sonodynamic therapy in inertial acoustic cavitation threshold,
combined with ionizing radiation in the presence of biocompatible nanoparticles,
could enhance the therapeutic effects on the miR-1204, derived from lncRNA PVT1,
that functions as an oncogenic microRNA in breast cancer. This approach has the
potential to overcome treatment resistance encountered with single therapies.
BACKGROUND: Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9) is a DNA recognizing receptor expressed
also in several cancers. Decreased TLR9 expression is associated with poor
prognosis in triple negative breast cancer (TNBC), but the role of TLR9 in
breast cancer pathophysiology is currently unclear. Regulation of TLR9
expression in breast cancer is poorly understood. Human papillomavirus (HPV)
infections suppress TLR9 expression in cervical cancers but the association
between HPV and breast cancer has remained controversial. The aim of this study
was to test if HPV16 can suppress TLR9 expression in breast cancer cells and
affect cell behavior.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Human T-47D and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells were
transduced with lentivirus encoding HPV16 E6 oncoprotein. The effects of E6 on
TLR9 mRNA and protein expression, and cell proliferation, migration, invasion
and sensitivity to chemotherapy were studied in vitro. Breast cancer tissue
samples (n = 37) were analyzed for the presence of HPV DNA. E6 expression
decreased TLR9 mRNA expression in MDA-MB-231 and T-47D cells in hypoxia. E6
expression altered breast cancer cell proliferation and made cells significantly
less sensitive to the growth inhibitory effects of chemotherapeutic agents. HPV
L1 gene was not detected in a small pilot cohort of clinical breast cancer
specimens.
CONCLUSION: HPV16 may influence breast cancer cell TLR9 transcription and
chemotherapy responses and could thereby affect breast cancer prognosis. These
results suggest that HPV may have a previously unrecognized role in breast
cancer pathophysiology and warrant further studies on the topic.
BACKGROUND: Neoadjuvant pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy and adjuvant
pembrolizumab have been established as the optimal systemic therapies for
patients with early stage triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC); however, their
efficacy and feasibility in the Japanese population remain unexplored.
METHODS: This study included patients with early stage TNBC or low estrogen
receptor (ER) positivity (1-9%) with human epidermal growth factor receptor type
2- (HER2-) negative breast cancer who received neoadjuvant pembrolizumab plus
chemotherapy from October 2022 at Cancer Institute Hospital of Japanese
Foundation for Cancer Research. Information regarding clinicopathological
features, systemic therapy, treatment outcomes, and adverse events of patients
who underwent surgery by February 2024 was retrospectively collected.
RESULTS: Overall, 69 patients received neoadjuvant pembrolizumab plus
carboplatin and paclitaxel therapy, and 46 underwent surgery by February 2024.
The median age of the patients was 53.5 years, and 80.4% and 19.6% had stage II
and III disease, respectively. TNBC and ER-low HER2-negative breast cancer
accounted for 82.6% and 17.4% cases, respectively. Overall pathological complete
response rate was 56.5%, with 87.5% in patients with ER-low HER2-negative
tumors. The completion rates for neoadjuvant pembrolizumab, chemotherapy, and
pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy were 65.2%, 56.5%, and 52.2%, respectively.
Furthermore, 80.4% and 15.2% of patients experienced grade 3 or higher
treatment-related adverse events and immune-related adverse events,
respectively, and 34% experienced unexpected hospitalization during neoadjuvant
treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: The efficacy and safety profiles of neoadjuvant pembrolizumab plus
chemotherapy in the Japanese population are consistent with previous reports.
This regimen may have therapeutic potential against ER-low HER2-negative tumors
and TNBC.
BACKGROUND: Hereditary breast cancer is an autosomal dominant disease caused by
variants in genes such as BRCA1/2, RAD51, ATM, BRIP1, and others. In a previous
study using whole exome sequencing, we identified a germline variant of the LGR4
gene (rs34804482, NM_018490.5(LGR4):c.2531 A > G (p.Asp844Gly)) in a young Tuvan
breast cancer patient (belonging to the Turkic-speaking tribes of Central Asia).
The aim of this study was to determine the frequency of the variant of the LGR4
gene NM_018490.5(LGR4):c.2531 A > G (p.Asp844Gly) in ethnic groups of West
Siberia using the PCR-RT method.
METHODS: The study involved 735 breast cancer patients from ethnic groups in
Siberia, median age at diagnosis of 43 ± 15.6 years. The control group consisted
of 727 healthy women from Siberia, median age of 43.05 ± 13.5 years.
RESULTS: The frequency of this variant (rs34804482) was 0.015 in Russian, 0.022
in Buryat, and 0.069 in Tuvan breast cancer patients. In Tuvan women with breast
cancer, the frequency of the LGR4 gene variant was significantly higher than in
Russian BC patients (0.069 versus 0.015, X2 = 8.153, p = 0.005). The frequency
of the LGR4 gene variant (rs34804482) in healthy Tuvan women was significantly
higher than in healthy Russian women (0.066 versus 0.016, X2 = 6.368,
p = 0.012). The variant frequency in healthy Russians was close to that in
Europeans (0.016 versus 0.0219).
CONCLUSIONS: We found no statistically significant differences in the rs34804482
frequency between breast cancer patients and healthy individuals in the ethnic
groups studied. The highest frequency of this missense germline variant was
observed among Tuvans.
BACKGROUND: BReast CAncer gene 1 (BRCA1) and BReast CAncer gene 2 (BRCA2) encode
for tumor suppressor proteins which are critical regulators of the Homologous
Recombination (HR) pathway, the most precise and important DNA damage response
mechanism. Dysfunctional HR proteins cannot repair double-stranded DNA breaks in
mammalian cells, a situation called HR deficiency. Since their identification,
pathogenic variants and other alterations of BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes have been
associated with an increased risk of developing mainly breast and ovarian
cancer. Interestingly, HR deficiency is also detected in tumors not carrying
BRCA1/2 mutations, a condition termed "BRCAness".
MAIN TEXT: One of the main mechanisms causing the BRCAness phenotype is the
methylation of the BRCA1/2 promoters, and this epigenetic modification is
associated with carcinogenesis and poor prognosis mainly among patients with
breast and ovarian cancer. BRCA1 promoter methylation has been suggested as an
emerging biomarker of great predictive significance, especially concerning Poly
(ADP-ribose) Polymerase inhibitors (PARP inhibitor-PARPi) responsiveness, along
with or beyond BRCA1/2 mutations. However, as its clinical exploitation is still
insufficient, the impact of BRCA1/2 promoter methylation status needs to be
further evaluated. The current review aims to gather the latest findings about
the mechanisms that underline BRCA1/2 function as well as the molecular
characteristics of tumors associated with BRCA1/2 defects, by focusing on DNA
methylation. Furthermore, we critically analyze their translational meaning and
the validity of BRCA methylation biomarkers in predicting treatment response.
CONCLUSIONS: We believe that BRCA1/2 methylation alone or combined with other
biomarkers in a clinical setting is expected to change the scenery in prognosis
and predicting treatment response in multiple cancer types and is worthy of
further attention. The quantitative BRCA1 promoter methylation assessment might
predict treatment response in PARPi and analysis of BRCA1/2 methylation in
liquid biopsy might define patient subgroups at different time points that may
benefit from PARPi. Finally, we suggest a pipeline that could be implemented in
liquid biopsy to aid precision pharmacotherapy in BRCA-associated tumors.
BACKGROUND: The tumor immune microenvironment, particularly tumor-infiltrating
lymphocytes (TILs), plays a critical role in disease progression and treatment
response in triple-negative breast cancers (TNBCs). This study was aimed to
characterize the composition of TILs and investigate their clinicopathological
and prognostic significance with a special focus on the spatial distribution of
TILs in TNBCs.
METHODS: We analyzed TNBC samples through PanCancer Immune Profiling using
NanoString nCounter assays to identify immune-related genes that are expressed
differentially in relation to TIL levels and evaluated protein expression of
selected markers through immunohistochemical staining on tissue microarrays. For
a comprehensive assessment of the expression of cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) and
natural killer (NK) cell markers, a CTL-NK score was devised based on CD8+,
CD56+, CD57+, GNLY+, and GZMB+ TIL levels.
RESULTS: Gene expression analysis revealed significant upregulation of CTL and
NK cell-associated genes including GNLY, KLRC2, and GZMB in TIL-high TNBCs.
Immunohistochemical validation confirmed that TNBCs with higher TILs had a
greater amount of CD56+, CD57+, GNLY+, and GZMB+ TILs not only in absolute
number but also in proportion relative to CD4+ or CD8+ TILs. High TIL and its
subset (CD4+, CD8+, CD56+, CD57+, GNLY+, and GZMB+ TIL) infiltration correlated
with favorable clinicopathological features of tumor. In survival analysis, high
CTL-NK score was found to be an independent prognostic factor for better
disease-free survival (DFS) of the patients. Furthermore, uniformly high TIL
infiltration was linked to better DFS, whereas cases with heterogeneous TIL
infiltration showed no difference in survival compared to those with uniformly
low TIL infiltration.
CONCLUSION: Our study showed that CTL and NK cell-associated gene expression and
protein levels differ significantly according to TIL levels and that CTL-NK
score and distribution of TILs within tumors have a prognostic value. These
findings emphasize the importance of CTLs and NK cells as well as the spatial
uniformity of TIL infiltration in clinical outcome of TNBC patients, providing
valuable insights for refining prognostic assessments and guiding
immunotherapeutic strategies.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer (BC) is the most prevalent cancer among women.
Teachers play a crucial role in promoting healthy behaviors, including breast
cancer screening (BCS). This study aimed to assess the impact of an Health
Belief Model (HBM)-based educational intervention on BCS uptake, knowledge, and
beliefs among female Yemeni teachers in Klang Valley, Malaysia.
METHODS: A cluster-randomized controlled trial was conducted with 180
participants from 12 schools, randomly assigned to intervention or control
groups. The intervention group participated in a 90-minute educational session,
with follow-up assessments at baseline, and at 1, 3, and 6 months'
post-intervention, using validated Arabic questionnaires. Data analysis was
performed using SPSS version 22.0, with Generalized Estimating Equations (GEE)
applied to assess differences within and between groups over time. Statistical
significance was set at P < 0.05.
RESULTS: At baseline, there were no significant differences between groups.
Post-intervention, the intervention group showed significantly higher rates of
breast self-examination (BSE) and clinical breast examination (CBE) compared to
the control group, with adjusted odds ratios (AOR) of 17.51 (CI: 8.22-37.29) for
BSE and 2.75 (CI: 1.42-5.32) for CBE. Over six months, BSE performance in the
intervention group increased, with AORs improving from 11.01 (CI: 5.05-24.04) to
18.55 (CI: 8.83-38.99). Similarly, CBE uptake rose from 1.60 (CI: 1.02-2.52) to
2.27 (CI: 1.44-3.58). Secondary outcomes revealed significant gains in knowledge
and beliefs in the intervention group, including increased confidence in
performing BSE and reduced perceived barriers.
CONCLUSIONS: The HBM-based educational intervention effectively enhanced BCS
uptake, improved knowledge, and decreased barriers to BCS among Yemeni teachers
in Malaysia, highlighting the potential of targeted educational programs to
promote cancer screening behaviors in underserved populations.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: Retrospectively registered, ANZCTR
(ACTRN12618000173291). Registered on February 02, 2018.
BACKGROUND: In recent years, various magnetic resonance (MRI) and positron
emission tomography (PET) parameters have been investigated in breast cancer.
Parametric imaging focuses on the visualization and quantification of
biological, physiological, and pathological processes at the cellular and
molecular level. It therefore provides important insights into the key processes
in carcinogenesis and tumor progression. This article aims to illustrate the
importance for the management of breast cancer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Based on the current literature, an overview of the
current state of parametric breast imaging and its importance in therapy
management is given. Moreover, future opportunities and challenges are
highlighted.
RESULTS: Parametric imaging in breast cancer includes MRI, nuclear medicine
procedures such as PET, the combination of different techniques (PET-CT,
PET-MRI) and the use of specific radiotracers. Parametric MRI of the breast
mainly uses T2 and diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) as well as dynamic
contrast-enhanced MRI (CM-MRI). Quantitative and qualitative imaging biomarkers
provide insights into tumor biology and allow conclusions to be drawn about the
molecular subtype or prognosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Recently, parametric imaging has become established in breast
diagnostics. It is constantly evolving and will continue to gain in importance
in the forthcoming years. It offers the opportunity to improve the diagnosis and
treatment management of breast cancer.
BACKGROUND: The chemical exposome includes exposure to numerous environmental
and endogenous molecules, many of which have been linked to reproductive
outcomes due to their endocrine-disrupting properties. As several breast cancer
risk factors, including age and parity, are related to reproduction, it is
imperative to investigate the interplay between such factors and the chemical
exposome prior to conducting large scale exposome-based breast cancer studies.
OBJECTIVE: This pilot study aimed to provide an overview of the chemical
exposome in plasma samples from healthy women and identify associations between
environmental exposures and three risk factors for breast cancer: age, parity,
and age at menarche.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Plasma samples (n = 161), were selected based on
reproductive history from 100 women participating in the Northern Sweden Health
and Disease Study, between 1987 and 2006. Samples were analyzed by liquid
chromatography high-resolution mass spectrometry (LC-HRMS) for 77 priority
target analytes including contaminants and hormones, with simultaneous
untargeted profiling of the chemical exposome and metabolome. Linear mixed
effects models were applied to test associations between risk factors and
chemical levels.
RESULTS: Fifty-five target analytes were detected in at least one individual and
over 94,000 untargeted features were detected across all samples. Among
untargeted features, 430 could be annotated and were broadly classified as
environmental (246), endogenous (167) or ambiguous (17). Applying mixed effect
models to features detected in at least 70% of the samples (16,778), we found
seven targeted analytes (including caffeine and various per- and
poly-fluoroalkyl substances) and 38 untargeted features, positively associated
with age. The directionality of these associations reversed for parity,
decreasing with increasing births. Seven separate targeted analytes were
associated with age at menarche.
SIGNIFICANCE: This study demonstrates how a comprehensive chemical exposome
approach can be used to inform future research prioritization regarding
associations between known and unknown substances, reproduction, and breast
cancer risk.
IMPACT STATEMENT: This study illustrates how chemical exposomics of long-term
stored blood samples offers valuable insights to discover chemical exposures and
their potential links to disease in humans, particularly those related to
reproduction and breast cancer risk factors.
BACKGROUND: Previous studies explored MRI-based radiomic features for
differentiating between human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-zero,
HER2-low, and HER2-positive breast cancer, but deep learning's effectiveness is
uncertain.
PURPOSE: This study aims to develop and validate a deep learning system using
dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI (DCE-MRI) for automated tumor segmentation and
classification of HER2-zero, HER2-low, and HER2-positive statuses.
STUDY TYPE: Retrospective.
POPULATION: One thousand two hundred ninety-four breast cancer patients from
three centers who underwent DCE-MRI before surgery were included in the study
(52 ± 11 years, 811/204/279 for training/internal testing/external testing).
FIELD STRENGTH/SEQUENCE: 3 T scanners, using T1-weighted 3D fast spoiled
gradient-echo sequence, T1-weighted 3D enhanced fast gradient-echo sequence and
T1-weighted turbo field echo sequence.
ASSESSMENT: An automated model segmented tumors utilizing DCE-MRI data, followed
by a deep learning models (ResNetGN) trained to classify HER2 statuses. Three
models were developed to distinguish HER2-zero, HER2-low, and HER2-positive from
their respective non-HER2 categories.
STATISTICAL TESTS: Dice similarity coefficient (DSC) was used to evaluate the
segmentation performance of the model. Evaluation of the model performances for
HER2 statuses involved receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis
and the area under the curve (AUC), accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity. The
P-values <0.05 were considered statistically significant.
RESULTS: The automatic segmentation network achieved DSC values of 0.85 to 0.90
compared to the manual segmentation across different sets. The deep learning
models using ResNetGN achieved AUCs of 0.782, 0.776, and 0.768 in
differentiating HER2-zero from others in the training, internal test, and
external test sets, respectively. Similarly, AUCs of 0.820, 0.813, and 0.787
were achieved for HER2-low vs. others, and 0.792, 0.745, and 0.781 for
HER2-positive vs. others, respectively.
DATA CONCLUSION: The proposed DCE-MRI-based deep learning system may have the
potential to preoperatively distinct HER2 expressions of breast cancers with
therapeutic implications.
EVIDENCE LEVEL: 4 TECHNICAL EFFICACY: Stage 3.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer patients receiving chemotherapy may develop a serious
complication called febrile neutropenia (FN). We aimed to validate and compare
three existing FN prediction models for breast cancer patients receiving
chemotherapy in Taiwan.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This was a retrospective observational real-world study.
Data were acquired from the clinical research databases of three study
hospitals. Breast cancer patients who have received at least one antineoplastic
chemotherapy drug were chosen for the analysis. For evaluating the occurrence of
FN, we used both broad (a body temperature above 38°C with an absolute
neutrophil count (ANC) below 0.5 × 109/L or a body temperature above 38°C with a
diagnosis of neutropenia) and narrow definitions (having both fever and
neutropenia diagnoses or having both neutropenia and infection diagnoses).
Sensitivity, specificity, accuracy, positive predictive value (PPV), and
negative predictive value (NPV) were calculated for each selected FN model.
RESULTS: Among the 1903 patients identified, when the broad and narrow
definitions of FN were applied, 70 (3.7%) and 60 (3.2%) patients developed FN in
the first cycle, respectively. Using the broad FN definition, Aagaard's model
was the highest in sensitivity (90.0%), followed by Chantharakhit's (40.0%) and
Chen's (7.2%); in specificity, Chen's (93.6%) was the highest. In addition, the
accuracy was highest with the Chen model (90.4%). All three models' PPVs were
low, ranging from 0.5% to 4.2%, but all three models' NPVs were over 96.3%. When
the narrow FN definition was used, Chantharakhit's model showed a relatively
high improvement in sensitivity (53.3%) and PPV (3.9%) while negligible
increases or even slight decreases were seen in the other two models and in the
other performance indicators of Chantharakhit's model.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study provide important information for
clinicians when selecting models to identify patients at high-risk of FN. As the
model performance observed was less than satisfactory, improving the prediction
ability of the models is needed.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer CTCs have recently been recognized as an emerging
biomarker for liquid biopsy of breast cancer. In this work, based on
two-dimensional (2D) noble metal PtCo@rGO nanozymes and Au@CNTs bioconjugates, a
novel electrochemiluminescence (ECL) cytosensor was developed in order to detect
breast cancer CTCs (MCF-7) ultrasensitively.
RESULTS: The PtCo@rGO nanozymes possessed large specific surface area and high
efficiency peroxidase-like activity, which can be used as nanocarriers to anchor
and catalyze luminol ECL emission efficiently. Moreover, the PtCo@rGO nanozymes
have fractal nanostructures similar to that of CTCs and can capable of enhancing
the adhesion of MCF-7 when assembled together with aptamers containing
HS-modified epithelial specific cell adhesion molecules (EpCAM, S1).
Importantly, the S1/Au@CNTs bioconjugates loaded on the glassy carbon electrode
(GCE) can effectively capture MCF-7 cells. Benefiting from the above-mentioned
advantages, the ECL cytosensor constructed for MCF-7 cells detection performed
well with a wide linear range (2-1 × 104 cells mL-1) and a low limit of
detection (1 cells mL-1).
SIGNIFICANCE: The designed ECL cytosensor could provide a promising platform for
CTC-based liquid biopsy and have broad application prospects in breast cancer
early diagnosis and prognostic monitoring.
BACKGROUND: DNA methylation (DNAm)-based marker of aging, referred to as
'epigenetic age' or 'DNAm age' is a highly accurate multi-tissue biomarker for
aging, associated with age-related disease risk, including cancer. Breast cancer
(BC), an age-associated disease, is associated with older DNAm age and
epigenetic age acceleration (age accel) at tissue levels. But this raises a
question on the predictability of DNAm age/age accel in BC development,
emphasizing the importance of studying DNAm age in pre-diagnostic peripheral
blood (PB) in BC etiology and prevention.
METHODS: We included postmenopausal women from the largest study cohort and
prospectively investigated BC development with their pre-diagnostic DNAm in PB
leukocytes (PBLs). We estimated Horvath's pan-tissue DNAm age and investigated
whether DNAm age/age accel highly correlates with risk for developing
subtype-specific BC and to what degree the risk is modified by hormones and
lifestyle factors.
RESULTS: DNAm age in PBLs was tightly correlated with age in this age range, and
older DNAm age and epigenetic age accel were significantly associated with risk
for developing overall BC and luminal subtypes. Of note, in women with bilateral
oophorectomy before natural menopause experiencing shorter lifetime estrogen
exposure than those with natural menopause, epigenetic age accel substantially
influenced BC development, independent of obesity status and exogeneous estrogen
use.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings contribute to better understanding of biologic aging
processes that mediate BC carcinogenesis, detecting a non-invasive epigenetic
aging marker that better reflects BC development, and ultimately identifying the
elderly with high risk who can benefit from epigenetically targeted preventive
interventions.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer (BC) poses a significant global health challenge, with
chemotherapy resistance, especially to docetaxel, remaining a major obstacle in
effective treatment. The molecular mechanisms underlying this resistance are
critical for developing targeted therapeutic strategies.
OBJECTIVE: This study aims to explore the role of dual-specificity tyrosine
phosphorylation-regulated kinase 2 (DYRK2), a member of the DYRK family, in
docetaxel resistance in breast cancer cells and investigate its impact on
cellular responses, including drug sensitivity and migration. Additionally,
potential interactions between DYRK2 and Twist1, associated with
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and drug resistance, are explored.
METHODS: Docetaxel-resistant breast cancer cells were induced, and the
expression levels of DYRK2, Twist1, and related genes were evaluated using
real-time PCR and Western blotting. Lentivirus-mediated DYRK2 overexpression was
employed to assess its effect on drug sensitivity, migratory ability, and Twist1
expression. The relationship between DYRK2 and Twist1 was examined, focusing on
Twist1 ubiquitination. The impact of Twist1 on chemotherapy resistance and its
binding to the Glutathione S-transferase Pi 1 (GSTP1) promoter were also
investigated.
RESULTS: Docetaxel-resistant cells exhibited down-regulated DYRK2 and
up-regulated Twist1 expression. DYRK2 overexpression reversed drug resistance,
decreased migration, and attenuated Twist1 and GST-π expression. DYRK2 was found
to suppress Twist1 expression through ubiquitination, supported by decreased
Twist1 phosphorylation and increased ubiquitination after DYRK2 overexpression.
Twist1 overexpression counteracted DYRK2-induced drug sensitivity enhancement,
promoting GST-π expression, EMT, migration, and proliferation. Twist1 was shown
to bind to the GSTP1 promoter, enhancing its transcription. In vivo experiments
confirmed DYRK2's ability to suppress chemoresistance in breast cancer cells.
CONCLUSION: DYRK2 plays a pivotal role in overcoming docetaxel resistance in
breast cancer cells by suppressing Twist1 expression through ubiquitination,
impacting downstream signaling and cellular responses. This study provides
valuable insights for developing targeted therapies to improve breast cancer
treatment outcomes.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer survivors (BCS) may experience cardiotoxicities from
chemotherapy and oral endocrine therapy. Although a few studies have documented
that palpitations are prevalent and associated with poorer outcomes, there is
limited to no information on BCS' reporting of palpitations to healthcare
providers.
OBJECTIVES: To compare BCS who did and did not report their palpitations to a
healthcare provider and describe how those who did report palpitations recalled
their provider responding.
DESIGN: This was a cross-sectional, national, electronic, pilot survey of BCS
enrolled in the Love Army of Women registry.
METHODS: Participants (n = 52 with palpitations) completed standardized and
investigator-designed questionnaires. Data were analyzed using frequency and
descriptive statistics, chi-square tests, and Mann-Whitney tests. Responses to
one open-ended question were analyzed using frequency counts and standard
content analysis.
RESULTS: Compared to BCS who reported palpitations to a provider (n = 34), BCS
who did not report their palpitations (n = 18) were significantly more anxious
(p = 0.002) and more likely to feel palpitations as an irregular heartbeat
(70.6% versus 38.9%, p = 0.027). Among the 34 BCS who reported palpitations to a
provider, 32 completed the open-ended question. Of these 32 BCS, a majority
(n = 27, 84%) indicated their provider recommended cardiac testing and/or
referral to a cardiologist. Most (n = 24) reported completing testing. Test
results included diagnosis of a new arrhythmia or other cardiac abnormality
(n = 11, 46%), receipt of a new prescription (n = 5, 21%), or normal results
(n = 5, 21%). Five (16%) of the 32 BCS did not receive recommendations for
testing or referral and felt their provider normalized or dismissed their
symptoms.
CONCLUSION: Palpitations are a salient topic for further research and clinical
practice recommendations to address cardiac health in BCS.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is the prevailing malignancy among women, exhibiting a
discernible escalation in incidence within our nation; hormone receptor-positive
(HR+) human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-negative (HER2-) breast cancer is
the most common subtype. In this study, we aimed to search for a non-invasive,
specific, blood-based biomarker for the early detection of luminal A breast
cancer through proteomic studies.
METHODS: To explore new potential plasma biomarkers, we applied data-independent
acquisition (DIA), a technique combining liquid chromatography and tandem mass
spectrometry, to quantify breast cancer-associated plasma protein abundance from
a small number of plasma samples in 10 patients with luminal A breast cancer, 10
patients with benign breast tumors, and 10 healthy controls.
RESULTS: The proteomes of 30 participants in all cohorts were analyzed using the
DIA method, and a total of 517 proteins and 3584 peptides were quantified. We
found that there were significant differences in plasma protein expression
profiles between breast cancer patients and non-breast cancer patients, and
breast cancer was mainly related to lipid metabolism pathways. Finally, the
optimal protein combinations for the diagnosis of breast cancer were PON3,
IGLV3-10, and IGHV3-73 through multi-model analysis, which had a high prediction
accuracy for breast cancer (AUC = 0.92), and the model could also distinguish
breast cancer from HC (AUC = 0.92) and breast cancer from benign breast tumor
BACKGROUND: Previous breast carcinoma studies focused on the evaluation of
tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) or of tumoural stroma via the tumour
stroma ratio (TSR). Few studies assessed peritumoural lymphocytes and almost no
studies investigated a possible relationship between lymphocytes and stroma.
This prompted us to evaluate the amount of tumour cells, intra- and peritumoural
lymphocytes, and stroma in breast cancer to support the hypothesis that the
stroma may block the infiltration of lymphocytes inside the tumour.
METHODS: We collected a retrospective series of 158 breast cancers (<25 mm). In
addition to standard TILs and TSR evaluations, we assessed the percentages of
tumour cells, stromal myofibroblasts, intra- and peritumoural lymphocytes on
full-section tumours with haematoxylin and eosin and immunohistochemical
staining.
RESULTS: We showed significant negative correlations between the amounts of
stroma and both intra- and peritumoural lymphocyte percentages. Considering the
estrogen receptor positive invasive breast cancer of no special type cases, we
showed that TSR had a positive prognostic value with an optimal threshold of
10 %.
CONCLUSIONS: This study is one of the first to show inverse correlations between
tumoural stroma amount and intra- and peritumoural lymphocyte percentages, which
supports the hypothesis that tumoural stroma can prevent the recruitment of
lymphocytes around and within the tumour.
BACKGROUND: Observational investigations have indicated a notable correlation
between body mass index (BMI) and breast cancer (BC). Nevertheless, the precise
biological pathways driving this correlation remain ambiguous. Consequently, we
utilized Mendelian randomization (MR) techniques to explore the causative link
between BMI and genetic predisposition to BC, as well as the potential
intermediary influences.
METHODS: Utilizing extensive cohorts sourced from publicly accessible
genome-wide association studies (GWAS) datasets of European populations, we
conducted Mendelian randomization (MR) analysis. The primary method employed was
the Inverse Variance Weighted (IVW) model. We evaluated both heterogeneity and
horizontal pleiotropy. Our MR analysis unveiled several metabolites and sex
hormones as mediators in the association between BMI and BC.
RESULTS: The IVW model indicated significant negative causal correlations
between BMI and BC, ER+BC, and ER-BC. Thirty-five metabolites, thirty-three
metabolites and sex hormones, and fifteen metabolites respectively mediated the
causal effects of BMI on BC, ER+BC, and ER-BC. Furthermore, our study found that
BMI influences BC risk through different mediating factors; BMI increases ER+BC
risk through the pathway of sex hormones (biologically available testosterone)
and decreases the causal relationship of BC risk through multiple metabolite
pathways.
CONCLUSION: This study discovered that BMI increases ER+BC risk through the
pathway of sex hormones (biologically available testosterone), and decreases BC
risk through multiple metabolite pathways causally. These discoveries could
offer insights into the development of preventive strategies and interventions
for BC, while further investigations should delve into alternative feasible
biological pathways.
BACKGROUND: The breast-sharing technique uses the lower quadrants discarded from
a contralateral symmetrizing reduction mammoplasty to reconstruct the breast
after mastectomy. The aim of our study was to revisit this old technique and to
improve its vascular predictability by preoperative computed tomography
angiography (angio-CT) and intraoperative indocyanine green (ICG) imaging.
METHODS: Twenty-six patients were enrolled and assessed by a preoperative
angio-CT to localize and evaluate the internal mammary artery perforator (IMAP).
In the selected patients, a Wise skin-pattern reduction was designed to allow
elevation of a transversely oriented flap including both inferior poles. The
flap was based medially on the IMAP. After elevation, evaluation of its arterial
and venous perfusion was assessed with ICG.
RESULTS: Eight patients were excluded after pre- and intraoperative studies.
Sixteen breast-sharing flaps were performed. A distal flap venous compromise
appeared in 2 cases, requiring debridement and flap repositioning, and an
infection occurred in 1 case. Four patients had detectable firm lumps that
resolved. There were no issues with donor site healing, and a repositioning of
the areola was necessary in 2 patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Breast-sharing techniques have not gained popularity for many
reasons. By combining current understanding of breast cancer behavior,
experience with perforator anatomy, and angio-CT and ICG, we believe this study
gives a second life to this flap, identifying its weaknesses and improving them.
The IMAP propeller flap, simpler and safer in the presence of comorbidities than
a free flap, can be a good choice for well-selected candidates.
BACKGROUND: In breast reconstruction using the abdominal perforator flap, if the
flap capacity is too large, secondary revision procedures can be performed to
reduce flap volume and reconstruct the inframammary fold (IMF). We examined the
various revision methods and cosmetic results.
METHODS: This study included 28 patients who underwent secondary revision among
216 patients who had breast reconstruction using the abdominal perforator flap
between April 2012 and March 2019. The revision method, removal ability, and the
inferior breast point (IBP) were analyzed using medical records.
RESULTS: Revision methods included incision resection in 4 cases, liposuction
(LS) in 22 cases, LS and simultaneous IMF reconstruction in 2 cases, and post-LS
IMF reconstruction in 1 case. The average LS amount was 317 mL (range, 100
--700 mL). In 22 patients who underwent LS, the difference in preoperative IBP
was 1 cm or more in 19 (86.4%) cases and 1 cm or less in 3 (13.6%) cases. The
difference in postoperative IBP was 1 cm or more in 12 (54.5%) cases and 1 cm or
less in 10 (45.5%) cases. The receiver operating characteristic curve analysis
revealed that the cutoff LS amount for a postoperative IBP difference of 1 cm or
less was 375 mL.
CONCLUSIONS: The IBP was increased due to the decrease in flap volume. Revisions
were completed with no difference in the LS-only IBP, especially when the LS
amount was less than 375 mL. If the removal of 375 mL or more is necessary,
removal or reformation of the IMF can be considered. These findings can
potentially guide the planning of surgical procedures.
BACKGROUND: The deadliest, most dangerous subtype of breast cancer is
triple-negative, which lacks treatment targets and accounts for 30% of all
breast cancer-related deaths worldwide. TNBC is characterized by the expression
of no estrogen, progesterone, or human epidermal growth factor 2 receptors. This
suggests that new treatment modalities with fewer adverse effects are required.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of the present study was to investigate the therapeutic
potential of selenium compounds as an adjuvant therapy for Triple Negative
Breast Cancer (TNBC), either on their own or in conjunction with nutritional
supplements and chemotherapy medications.
METHODS: Using the keywords "selenium" and "triple negative breast cancer", a
thorough search was conducted in the PubMed database, yielding 23 articles. The
following factors were taken into consideration for inclusion: studies using
TNBC cell culture lines or in vivo tumors/specimens; full-text articles from the
PubMed database; studies published in the English language; experiments with
statistically significant results; and selenium used alone or in combination
with other antioxidants or chemotherapy. This led to the evaluation of 13
articles in this review.
RESULTS: The results show that selenium therapy increased the anti-cancer drug's
effects and produced tumor cytotoxicity, while reducing the cellular features of
the cancer (hyperproliferation, growth, and metastasis).
DISCUSSION: This study evaluated the various selenium compounds tested, the cell
lines and model organisms used, the assays performed, and the cellular pathways
affected.
CONCLUSION: Examining the possible benefits of selenium in TNBC treatment
highlights the need for more studies to confirm selenium compounds as viable
co-therapeutic agents.
BACKGROUND: Ado-trastuzumab emtansine (T-DM1) is prescribed for HER2-positive,
metastatic breast cancer or early breast cancer after neoadjuvant therapy.
Although several adverse events (AEs) have been reported, there remains a need
for a comprehensive evaluation of its safety profile.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: To quantify the signals of ado-trastuzumab
emtansine associated AEs, we employed the reporting odds ratio (ROR), the
proportional reporting ratio (PRR), the Bayesian confidence propagation neural
network (BCPNN), and the multi-item gamma Poisson shrinker (MGPS) algorithms.
RESULTS: Between Q1 2013 and Q4 2022, 3699 patient reports of AEs associated
with ado-trastuzumab emtansine were received, including 440 cases of
ado-trastuzumab emtansine-induced bleeding events. Of the 3699 patient reports,
142 significant disproportionality preferred terms (PTs) were identified. New
AEs have been identified with ado-trastuzumab emtansine administration,
including telangiectasia, spider nevus, pericardial effusion, pleural effusion,
radiation necrosis, and corneal disorders. The most common bleeding events were
observed in the digestive system (27.05%), respiratory system (35.00%), and
nervous system (14.55%). Hemorrhagic adverse events exhibited early failure-type
characteristics.
CONCLUSION: This analysis offers the most comprehensive overview of
ado-trastuzumab emtansine induced hemorrhage to date, shedding new light on this
severe complication. Understanding the underlying mechanisms of these positive
PTs can provide useful insights for further research.
BACKGROUND: Denosumab, a fully humanized monoclonal neutralizing antibody
inhibiting the RANK/RANKL/OPG signaling pathway, is widely used for treating
patients with bone metastases. However, its use in cancer patients with bone
metastases is burdened by the risk of all grades of hypocalcemia, with the
severe grade being rare. In the literature, several cases of severe symptomatic
hypocalcemia have been reported, particularly in patients with breast and
prostate cancers. In this report, we present a rare case of asymptomatic
hypocalcemia in a 78 years-old patient with sigmoid cancer and bone metastases.
CASE PRESENTATION: Hypocalcemia was detected two weeks after the first denosumab
administration, during routine biochemical evaluation. The patient reported only
a mild nonspecific paresthesia after medical questioning, without relevant
clinical symptoms. Despite the severity of the hypocalcemia, serum calcium
levels began to improve after a short period of low-dose calcium and calcitriol
therapy, though complete stabilization and normalization occurred after several
weeks.
CONCLUSION: This case highlights the importance to consider severe
paucisymptomatic or asymptomatic hypocalcemia as a possible side effect in
bone-metastatic patients treated with denosumab. It is advisable to monitor
serum calcium levels even in the absence of typical hypocalcemia-related
symptoms.
BACKGROUND: This randomized controlled trial examines the effectiveness of a
"teach-back" educational strategy in increasing knowledge about breast cancer
among women with low health literacy.
METHODS: Data collection for this study was conducted at the Farabi
Comprehensive Health Services Center in Sanandaj, Iran, between December 2020
and October 2022. In this randomized controlled trial, 84 women who had low
health literacy were randomly allocated into groups of the study (teach back,
and control groups). The educational intervention focused on increasing
knowledge of breast cancer risk factors, signs and symptoms, early detection
methods (including breast self-examination), and the importance of regular
screening. The intervention group received 3 face to face education within three
weekly sessions, each lasting 20 min. The Health Literacy Instrument for Adults
(HELIA), breast cancer knowledge was measured by valid tool and compared in the
two groups before and eight weeks after the interventions.
RESULTS: Mean scores of breast cancer knowledge revealed significant differences
between intervention group and control group (P < 0.001) eight weeks after
intervention. There were significant differences between baseline and follow-up
measurement scores demonstrating that there were differences in the
participants' breast cancer knowledge (P < 0.001), and diagnosis technique
knowledge (P < 0.008), between the intervention and control groups.
CONCLUSION: Teach Back educational strategy increased knowledge breast cancer
among low health literacy women. Teach Back educational strategy seems to be
effective for women with low health literacy.
BACKGROUND: The objective of this study was to investigate the association
between focal breast edema (FBE) and adjacent vessel sign (AVS) with tumor size,
histologic grade, lymphovascular invasion, axillary lymph node status, Ki-67
index, and molecular subtype in breast cancer. These findings have provided
valuable insights into the biological characteristics and prognosis of mass-type
invasive ductal carcinoma (M-IDC).
METHODS: We retrospectively included patients with M-IDC between January 2016
and December 2021. FBE was evaluated using T2-weighted sequence. AVS was
assessed using maximum-intensity projection images obtained using early dynamic
contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging. The breast peritumor score (BPS)
was defined as follows: BPS 1, absence of both edema and AVS; BPS 2, AVS without
edema; BPS 3, AVS with peritumoral edema; BPS 4, AVS with prepectoral edema; and
BPS 5, AVS with subcutaneous edema. The correlation between different BPS scores
and clinicopathological variables was examined using Kendall's tau-b correlation
coefficient. The DeLong test was used to compare the performances of three
clinicopathological models combined with peritumoral features (FBE, AVS, and
BPS) in predicting luminal A-like M-IDC.
RESULTS: In 228 patients with M-IDC, BPS was positively correlated with tumor
size, histologic grade, lymphovascular invasion, axillary lymph node status,
Ki-67 index, and negatively correlated with estrogen receptor expression (all
P < 0.05). Furthermore, BPS 1 was more likely to be present in patients with
luminal A-like breast cancer (P < 0.001). Among the three prediction models, the
clinicopathological model combined with the BPS model demonstrated superior
diagnostic performance for luminal A-like breast cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: The BPS is a valuable, non-invasive biomarker for assessing the
aggressiveness of M-IDC and can facilitate treatment planning.
BACKGROUND: In the French West Indies, previous studies have reported findings
on pesticide exposure and cancer incidence. A new exploratory geographical
study, including a more sensitive soil contamination indicator, will provide
more detailed information on the link between cancer incidence and
organochlorine pesticide exposure. This study aims to investigate the
association between incident cases of cancer and chlordecone soil contamination
at an IRIS scale over the period 2006-2019 in Martinique.
METHODS: Data on the 18 most frequent cancer sites were collected from the
Martinique Population Based Cancer Registry. First, smoothed standardized
incidence ratios at the level of the 141 IRIS were estimated, and
then regression models including the smoothed standardized ratios  were
performed between cancer incidence and soil contamination index by sex and
cancer site, using the Besag, York and Mollié models. Models were adjusted using
an index of social deprivation.
RESULTS: 23,218 cancer cases were eligible for this study, with 21,920 cases
included in the final analysis. Soil contamination was associated with a higher
relative risk of cancer in women than in men, but no significant correlation was
found for breast cancer in women or for prostate cancer. Lung, thyroid, stomach
and rectal cancers in women, and melanoma in men, all increase significantly
with the level of contamination. There was a significant increasing gradient in
the incidence of multiple myeloma in men, from reference to highly contaminated
areas.
CONCLUSION: Integrating the latest available data on soil contamination and
cancer incidence will extend on-going knowledge of chlordecone exposure and
cancer incidence, which remains a major environmental concern in Martinique.
Unexpectedly, our results show that the female population of Martinique is the
most affected by chlordecone soil contamination.
BACKGROUND: Alpelisib, a PI3Kα-selective inhibitor and degrader, plus
fulvestrant showed efficacy in hormone receptor-positive, HER2-negative,
PIK3CA-mutated advanced breast cancer in SOLAR-1; limited data are available in
the post-cyclin-dependent kinase 4/6 inhibitor setting. BYLieve aimed to assess
alpelisib plus endocrine therapy in this setting in three cohorts defined by
immediate previous treatment; here, we report results from cohort A.
METHODS: This ongoing, phase 2, multicentre, open-label, non-comparative study
enrolled patients with hormone receptor-positive, HER2-negative, advanced breast
cancer with tumour PIK3CA mutation, following progression on or after previous
therapy, including CDK4/6 inhibitors, from 114 study locations (cancer centres,
medical centres, university hospitals, and hospitals) in 18 countries worldwide.
Participants aged 18 years or older with an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group
performance status of 2 or less, with no more than two previous anticancer
treatments and no more than one previous chemotherapy regimen, were enrolled in
three cohorts. In cohort A, patients must have had progression on or after a
CDK4/6 inhibitor plus an aromatase inhibitor as the immediate previous
treatment. Patients received oral alpelisib 300 mg/day (continuously) plus
fulvestrant 500 mg intramuscularly on day 1 of each 28-day cycle and on day 15
of cycle 1. The primary endpoint was the proportion of patients alive without
disease progression at 6 months per local assessment using Response Evaluation
Criteria in Solid Tumors, version 1.1, in patients with a centrally confirmed
PIK3CA mutation. This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT03056755.
FINDINGS: Between Aug 14, 2017, and Jul 29, 2022 (data cutoff), 127 patients
with at least 18 months' follow-up were enrolled into cohort A. 119 patients had
a centrally confirmed PIK3CA mutation. At data cutoff, median follow-up was 21·8
months (IQR 10·8-37·6). 64 (53·8%; 95% CI 44·4-63·0) of 119 patients were alive
without disease progression at 6 months. The most frequent grade 3 or worse
adverse events were hyperglycaemia (37 [29%] of 127 patients), rash (13 [10%]),
and rash maculopapular (11 [9%]). Serious adverse events occurred in 37 (29%) of
127 patients. No treatment-related deaths were reported.
INTERPRETATION: BYLieve showed activity of alpelisib plus fulvestrant with
manageable toxicity in patients with PIK3CA-mutated, hormone receptor-positive,
HER2-negative advanced breast cancer, after progression on a CDK4/6 inhibitor
plus an aromatase inhibitor.
FUNDING: Novartis Pharmaceuticals.
BACKGROUND: More than 85% of patients report heightened levels of anxiety
following breast cancer diagnosis. Anxiety may become amplified during the early
stages of breast cancer diagnosis when ambiguity is high. High levels of anxiety
can negatively impact patients by reducing their ability to function physically,
make decisions, and adhere to treatment plans, with all these elements combined
serving to diminish the quality of life.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to use individual social media posts about breast
cancer experiences from Reddit (r/breastcancer) to understand the factors
associated with breast cancer-related anxiety as individuals move from
suspecting to confirming cancer diagnosis.
METHODS: We used a mixed method approach by combining natural language
processing-based computational methods with descriptive analysis. Our team coded
the entire corpus of 2170 unique posts from the r/breastcancer subreddit with
respect to key variables, including whether the post was related to
prediagnosis, diagnosis, or postdiagnosis concerns. We then used Linguistic
Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) to rank-order the codified posts as low, neutral,
or high anxiety. High-anxiety posts were then retained for deep descriptive
analysis to identify key themes relative to diagnostic progression.
RESULTS: After several iterations of data analysis and classification through
both descriptive and computational methods, we identified a total of 448
high-anxiety posts across the 3 diagnostic categories. Our analyses revealed
that individuals experience higher anxiety before a confirmed cancer diagnosis.
Analysis of the high-anxiety posts revealed that the factors associated with
anxiety differed depending on an individual's stage in the diagnostic process.
Prediagnosis anxiety was associated with physical symptoms, cancer-related risk
factors, communication, and interpreting medical information. During the
diagnosis period, high anxiety was associated with physical symptoms,
cancer-related risk factors, communication, and difficulty navigating the health
care system. Following diagnosis, high-anxiety posts generally discussed topics
related to treatment options, physical symptoms, emotional distress, family, and
financial issues.
CONCLUSIONS: This study has practical, theoretical, and methodological
implications for cancer research. Content analysis reveals several possible
drivers of anxiety at each stage (prediagnosis, during diagnosis, and
postdiagnosis) and provides key insights into how clinicians can help to
alleviate anxiety at all stages of diagnosis. Findings provide insights into
cancer-related anxiety as a process beginning before engagement with the health
care system: when an individual first notices possible cancer symptoms.
Uncertainty around physical symptoms and risk factors suggests the need for
increased education and improved access to trained medical staff who can assist
patients with questions and concerns during the diagnostic process. Assistance
in understanding technical reports, scheduling, and patient-centric clinician
behavior may pinpoint opportunities for improved communication between patients
and providers.
BACKGROUND: Retroareolar region refers to the region within two centimeters from
the nipple and/or involves the nipple-areolar complex on mammogram. In this
study, we graded asymmetric retroareolar density on mammography and determined
the underlying cause.
OBJECTIVES: To identify and grade retroareolar densities and evaluate
characteristics of lesion using ultrasonography and histopathology.
METHODS: Mammograms with asymmetric retroareolar density done in our tertiary
care hospital were included. Retroareolar density was categorized into three
grades based on morphological appearance in mammography. Sonography was
performed in all patients and tissue diagnosis was obtained for suspicious
lesions.
RESULTS: Of the 100 patients included in the study, most of the patients with
mammographic grade 1, grade 2 and 3 retroareolar asymmetry had normal
sonography, pathologically proven mastitis and invasive ductal carcinoma,
respectively. Presenting indication usually was diagnostic (n = 87), lump being
most common. Benign (58%) diagnosis was more often present, with equal number of
normal studies and malignancies (21%). Frequently pathologically proven
malignant lesions (n = 17) had grade 3 asymmetry and none were grade 1. Invasive
ductal carcinoma was the most common malignancy while mastitis the most common
benign disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Grade I retroareolar asymmetric density on mammography was normal
or had a benign etiology while grade 2 or 3 asymmetric density had underlying
pathology, often malignancy.
CONTRIBUTION: Grading retroareolar density in mammogram may improve the
evaluation of retroareolar region and increase emphasis on higher grades.
BACKGROUND: The co-occurrence of breast cancer and diabetes presents complex
clinical challenges, as each condition may influence the progression and
management of the other, potentially worsening patient outcomes. This study aims
to examine the association between insulin use and the risks of all-cause
mortality, breast cancer-specific mortality, and recurrence in diabetic patients
with breast cancer.
METHODS: A systematic review and meta-analysis were conducted using studies
identified from multiple databases, including Web of Science, Scopus, PubMed,
Cochrane, Google Scholar, and Embase. The meta-analysis approach was used to
estimate the relative risk (RR) of the relationship between insulin use and the
risks of all-cause mortality, breast cancer-specific mortality, and recurrence
in diabetic patients with breast cancer. Heterogeneity among studies was
assessed using statistical tests such as the Chi-square test, I2, and forest
plots. Meta-regression and sensitivity analyses were performed to explore
sources of heterogeneity. The quality of the included studies was assessed using
the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale checklist. Data were analyzed using Stata version 17
(Stata Corp, College Station, Texas).
RESULTS: Data from 22 studies conducted between 2002 and 2023, with a total of
159,674 participants, were analyzed. Nineteen studies were rated as high
quality, and three as moderate quality. Diabetic patients with breast cancer who
received insulin had a 1.65 (95% CI: 1.36-2.02; P < 0.001; I2 = 89.7%) times
higher risk of overall mortality compared to those who did not use insulin.
Meta-regression revealed that sample size and study quality were significant
contributors to heterogeneity (P ≤ 0.10). Furthermore, insulin use was
associated with a 1.22 (95% CI: 1.05-1.42; P = 0.009; I2 = 37.9%) times higher
risk of breast cancer-specific mortality. For breast cancer recurrence, insulin
use was associated with a 1.45 (95% CI: 1.19-1.77; P < 0.001; I2 = 3.4%) times
higher risk. Sensitivity analysis confirmed the stability of the results across
all outcomes.
CONCLUSION: This meta-analysis provides strong evidence that insulin use in
diabetic patients with breast cancer is associated with increased risks of
overall mortality, breast cancer-specific mortality, and recurrence. These
findings underscore the need for careful consideration of insulin therapy in
this patient population.
BACKGROUND: Two-stage prosthetic breast reconstruction involves the exchange of
tissue expanders for implants, but complications of this procedure can
necessitate revision surgeries and implant removal. The choice between remote
incision (RI) and traditional access via existing mastectomy scars (MS) for this
exchange remains underexplored. RIs offer potential benefits by placing the
incision at a region of higher quality tissue, prompting our comparative
analysis of complications between RI and MS.
METHODS: We retrospectively analysed patients undergoing expander-to-implant
exchange via RI or MS access during 2018 through 2023. Data on demographics,
comorbidities, cancer characteristics, surgeries, therapies, and outcomes were
collected from the electronic medical record, and complication rates were
compared between RI and MS exchange procedures.
RESULTS: In propensity-score matched cohorts, overall complications (10% for MS
and 7.5% for RI, p = 0.58), infection (5.0% for MS vs. 2.5% for RI, p = 0.68),
seroma (2.5% for both, p>0.99), dehiscence (2.5% for both, p>0.99), implant
exposure (2.5% for MS vs. 1.2% for RI, p>0.99), and implant explantation (7.5%
for MS vs. 6.2% for RI, p=0.75) were similar or lower in the RI group. Overall
complications, infection, seroma, dehiscence, implant exposure, and explantation
were also lower in radiated patients receiving RI compared to MS exchanges,
though statistically insignificant. Transaxillary and inframammary incisions
showed comparable outcomes, albeit the latter having a higher incidence of
infections.
CONCLUSIONS: RIs represent a safe alternative to MS exchanges in selected,
high-risk patients undergoing post-mastectomy implant-based breast
reconstruction.
BACKGROUND: During long-term treatment, breast cancer survivors (BCSs) often
experience decreased sleep quality and quality of life and increased fatigue.
The interplay between these factors continually worsens the physical and
psychological states of BCSs. Although yoga exercise has been shown to improve
these adverse outcomes, the exact dose required is unknown. The purpose of our
study was to determine the optimal yoga dose for improving cancer-related
fatigue, sleep quality, and quality of life in BCSs.
METHODS: A systematic search of MEDLINE, Embase, the Cochrane Library, and Web
of Science was conducted from the beginning of the database search until March
2024 to identify randomized controlled trials on the effects of yoga exercise on
BCS-specific outcomes. Paired and dose-response meta-analyses were performed
using Bayesian hierarchical random-effects models to analyze these effects.
RESULTS: A total of 2423 breast cancer survivors were included in the 32
studies, with 1252 in the yoga intervention group and 1171 in the control group.
Yoga intervention improved fatigue (standard mean difference [SMD]: - 0.55; 95%
CrI, - 0.64 to - 0.45. Standard deviation [SD]: 0.32; 95% CrI, 0.23 to 0.45.
RSRF ≤ 1.01), sleep quality (SMD: - 0.29; 95% CrI, - 0.43 to - 0.15. SD: 0.56;
95% CrI, 0.35 to 0.88. RSRF ≤ 1.01), and quality of life (SMD: 0.42; 95% CrI,
0.30 to - 0.53. SD: 0.32; 95% CrI, 0.23 to 0.45. RSRF ≤ 1.01) in BCS. It has a
nonlinear dose-response relationship, a U-shaped dose-response relationship with
fatigue and quality of life, and a positively correlated dose-response
relationship with sleep quality. The optimal exercise dose for improving both
fatigue and quality of life was 510 METs-min/week, and sleep quality
significantly improved when the dose exceeded 160 METs-min/week. Yoga was less
effective for fatigue during treatment compared to post-treatment, while its
effects on quality of life and sleep quality remained relatively stable
throughout both periods. Furthermore, with increasing age, the benefits of yoga
interventions for improving fatigue and sleep quality in BCS decrease, while the
benefits for improving quality of life increase.
CONCLUSIONS: This meta-analysis provided critical information on the optimal
weekly dose of yoga exercise (220 min/week) to improve fatigue, sleep quality,
and quality of life in patients with BCSs. Practitioners should consider the
therapeutic stage and age of BCSs when developing yoga strategies to maximize
the benefits.
IMPLICATIONS FOR CANCER SURVIVORS: For BCS, personalized yoga interventions
tailored to treatment stages and age, coupled with regular
effectiveness assessments, can significantly enhance recovery and improve
quality of life.
BACKGROUND: Identifying changes in geographical disparities of cancer mortality
reveals locations where cancer prevention and control efforts should be
focused/targeted. We use recent cancer surveillance data to demonstrate the
geographical disparity of major cancer mortality rates in the US and its shift
compared to previous data.
METHODS: This cross-sectional study used the 2018-2022 county-level mortality
rates of colorectal, lung, breast and prostate cancer from the CDC mortality
data. Counties with suppressed death counts were imputed by spatial regression
models. Getis-Ord Gi* statistics were used to evaluate spatial clustering of
county mortality. Identified hotspot counties were visualized and compared with
literature for hotspot pattern change.
RESULTS: A total of 3108 US mainland counties were included. Cancer mortality
rates were significantly higher in 244 counties for colorectal, 456 for lung,
147 for breast and 180 for prostate. Hotspot areas were central Appalachia (for
colorectal and lung), Lower Mississippi Delta (colorectal, breast and prostate),
Midwest (colorectal and lung), north Michigan/Wisconsin (lung and prostate),
north Florida (lung), and the West (prostate).
CONCLUSIONS: West central Appalachia and Lower Mississippi Delta continue to be
hotspots for major cancer types, while previously identified eastern North
Carolina/Virginia hotspots shrunk, east Oklahoma and north Florida emerged as
the new hotspot for lung cancer, and several hotspots emerged in the West for
prostate cancer.
IMPACT: This study updated the analyses for geospatial disparity in major
cancers' mortality since 2018-illustrating recent changes in the disparity
pattern and pinpointing areas that cancer prevention and control efforts should
target.
BACKGROUND: Patients undergoing abdominal-based free flap breast reconstruction
are at risk for perioperative venous thromboembolism (VTE), but the optimal
anticoagulation protocol remains unknown. We hypothesized that a standardized
chemoprophylaxis protocol would minimize VTE events without increasing hematoma,
flap loss, or reoperation.
METHODS: A retrospective review was conducted on patients who underwent
abdominal-based free flap breast reconstruction from 2010 to 2023. In 2015, we
implemented an enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) protocol including
preoperative enoxaparin. Patients with a BMI < 30 and > 30 received enoxaparin
for 7 and 30 days postoperatively, respectively. 2010-2015 patients were
pre-ERAS and 2015-2023 patients were the ERAS cohort. Patient demographics,
comorbidities, and outcomes were analyzed. The primary outcomes were VTE,
hematoma, flap loss, and reoperation.
RESULTS: 2317 patients were included: 679 were pre-ERAS and 1638 were in the
ERAS cohort. The incidence of deep vein thrombosis (0.7%) and pulmonary embolism
(pre-ERAS 0.6% vs. ERAS 0.5%) was low in both cohorts with no significant
differences. Hematoma (pre-ERAS 7.2% vs. ERAS 5.5%) and reoperation (pre-ERAS
7.8% vs. ERAS 9.7%) were similar, but the ERAS cohort had significantly lower
flap failure (0.7% vs. 2.1%, p < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: A standardized perioperative anticoagulation protocol for
abdominal-based breast reconstruction maintained low VTE rates without
increasing hematoma, flap failure, or reoperation.
BACKGROUND: Gemcitabine plus capecitabine (GX) shows survival benefit and
manageable safety in patients with advanced triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC)
but there is a paucity of phase III trial evidence. We aimed to compare the
efficacy and safety of GX with gemcitabine plus carboplatin (GC) as first-line
treatment for patients with advanced TNBC and validate the prognostic value of
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs).
METHODS: Patients with advanced TNBC were randomly assigned 1:1 to receive
gemcitabine (1000 mg/m2) on days 1 and 8 plus oral capecitabine (1000 mg/m2
twice a day) on days 1-14, or gemcitabine (1000 mg/m2) on days 1 and 8 plus
carboplatin area under curve 2 on days 1 and 8. The primary endpoint was
progression-free survival (PFS). TILs were analyzed by immunohistochemistry. The
margin used to establish non-inferiority was 1.2.
RESULTS: In all, 187 patients were randomly assigned, with 93 in GX and 94 in
GC. Median PFS was 6.1 months in the GX arm compared with 6.3 months in the GC
arm. The hazard ratio for PFS was 1.148, and a 95% CI was 0.856-1.539, exceeding
the non-inferiority margin of 1.2. The median overall survival (OS) was
21.0 months in the GX arm compared with 21.5 months in the GC arm. The safety
profile for the GX regimen was superior to the GC regimen, especially regarding
hematological toxicity. Patients with high CD8+ TILs had significantly longer
PFS and OS compared with patients with low CD8+ TILs. In the high CD8+ TIL
group, the GC arm had prolonged PFS and OS compared with the GX arm.
CONCLUSION: The trial did not meet the prespecified criteria for the primary
endpoint of PFS in patients with advanced TNBC. Moreover, the GC regimen showed
better efficacy compared with the GX regimen in patients with high CD8+ TILs.
However, the GX regimen should be considered in patients who cannot tolerate
hematological toxicity.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT02207335.
BACKGROUND: Pathologist-read tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) have
showcased their predictive and prognostic potential for early and metastatic
triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) but it is still subject to variability.
Artificial intelligence (AI) is a promising approach toward eliminating
variability and objectively automating TILs assessment. However, demonstrating
robust analytical and prognostic validity is the key challenge currently
preventing their integration into clinical workflows.
METHODS: We evaluated the impact of ten AI models on TILs scoring, emphasizing
their distinctions in TILs analytical and prognostic validity. Several AI-based
TILs scoring models (seven developed and three previously validated AI models)
were tested in a retrospective analytical cohort and in an independent
prospective cohort to compare prognostic validation against invasive
disease-free survival endpoint with 4 years median follow-up. The development
and analytical validity set consisted of diagnostic tissue slides of 79 women
with surgically resected primary invasive TNBC tumors diagnosed between 2012 and
2016 from the Yale School of Medicine. An independent set comprising of 215 TNBC
patients from Sweden diagnosed between 2010 and 2015, was used for testing
prognostic validity.
FINDINGS: A significant difference in analytical validity (Spearman's
r = 0.63-0.73, p < 0.001) is highlighted across AI methodologies and training
strategies. Interestingly, the prognostic performance of digital TILs is
demonstrated for eight out of ten AI models, even less extensively trained ones,
with similar and overlapping hazard ratios (HR) in the external validation
cohort (Cox regression analysis based on IDFS-endpoint, HR = 0.40-0.47;
p < 0.004).
INTERPRETATION: The demonstrated prognostic validity for most of the AI TIL
models can be attributed to the intrinsic robustness of host anti-tumor immunity
(measured by TILs) as a biomarker. However, the discrepancies between AI models
should not be overlooked; rather, we believe that there is a critical need for
an accessible, large, multi-centric dataset that will serve as a benchmark
ensuring the comparability and reliability of different AI tools in clinical
implementation.
FUNDING: Nikos Tsiknakis is supported by the Swedish Research Council (Grant
Number 2021-03061, Theodoros Foukakis). Balazs Acs is supported by The Swedish
Society for Medical Research (Svenska Sällskapet för Medicinsk Forskning)
postdoctoral grant. Roberto Salgado is supported by a grant from Breast Cancer
Research Foundation (BCRF).
BACKGROUND: Observational studies have investigated the association between
lipid-lowering drugs and breast cancer (BC) and endometrial cancer (EC), but
some controversy remains.
OBJECTIVE: This paper aims to explore the causal relationship between genetic
proxies for lipid-lowering drugs and breast and endometrial cancers using
drug-target Mendelian randomization (MR).
METHODS: Analyses were mainly performed using inverse variance weighted (IVW),
heterogeneity and horizontal pleiotropy tests, and sensitivity analysis to
assess the robustness of the results and causal relationship.
RESULTS: HMGCR, APOB, and NPC1L1 increased the risk of breast cancer, LPL
increased the risk of endometrial cancer, and APOC3 decreased the risk of breast
and endometrial cancer. No heterogeneity or horizontal pleiotropy was detected,
and nor was there any evidence of an association between other lipid-lowering
drugs and breast and endometrial cancer.
CONCLUSION: Our study demonstrated genetically that HMGCR inhibition, APOB
inhibition, and NPC1L1 inhibition decrease the risk of breast cancer, LPL
agonist increases the risk of endometrial cancer, and APOC3 inhibition decreases
the risk of breast cancer and endometrial cancer, and these findings provide
genetic insights into the potential risks of lipid-lowering drug therapy.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer subtypes Luminal A and Luminal B are classified by the
expression of PAM50 genes and may benefit from different treatment strategies.
Machine learning models based on H&E images may contain features associated with
subtype, allowing early identification of tumors with higher risk of recurrence.
METHODS: H&E images (n = 630 ER+/HER2-breast cancers) were pixel-level segmented
into epithelium and stroma. Convolutional neural network and multiple instance
learning were used to extract image features from original and segmented images.
Patient-level classification models were trained to discriminate Luminal A
versus B image features in tenfold cross-validation, with or without grade
adjustment. The best-performing visual classifier was incorporated into
envisioned diagnostic protocols as an alternative to genomic testing (PAM50).
The protocols were then compared in time-to-recurrence models.
RESULTS: Among ER+/HER2-tumors, the image-based protocol differentiated
recurrence times with a hazard ratio (HR) of 2.81 (95% CI: 1.73-4.56), which was
similar to the HR for PAM50 (2.66, 95% CI: 1.65-4.28). Grade adjustment did not
improve subtype prediction accuracy, but did help balance sensitivity and
specificity. Among high grade participants, sensitivity and specificity (0.734
and 0.474, respectively) became more similar (0.732 and 0.624, respectively) in
grade-adjusted models. The original and epithelium-specific images had similar
performance and highest accuracy, followed by stroma or binarized images showing
only the epithelial-stromal interface.
CONCLUSIONS: Given low rates of genomic testing uptake nationally, image-based
methods may help identify ER+/HER2-patients who could benefit from testing.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is the most common malignancy among women worldwide,
characterized by complex molecular and cellular heterogeneity. Despite advances
in diagnosis and treatment, there is an urgent need to identify reliable
biomarkers and therapeutic targets to improve early detection and personalized
therapy. The OAS (2'-5'-oligoadenylate synthetase) family genes, known for their
roles in antiviral immunity, have emerged as potential regulators in cancer
biology. This study aimed to explore the diagnostic and functional relevance of
OAS family genes in breast cancer.
METHODOLOGY: Breast cancer cell lines and controls were cultured under specific
conditions, and DNA and RNA were extracted for downstream analyses. RT-qPCR,
bisulfite sequencing, and Western blotting were employed to assess gene
expression, promoter methylation, and knockdown efficiency of OAS family genes.
Functional assays, including CCK-8, colony formation, and wound healing,
evaluated cellular behaviors, while bioinformatics tools (UALCAN, GEPIA, HPA,
OncoDB, cBioPortal, and others) validated findings and explored correlations
with clinical data.
RESULTS: The OAS family genes (OAS1, OAS2, OAS3, and OASL) were found to be
significantly upregulated in breast cancer cell lines and tissues compared to
normal controls. This overexpression was strongly associated with reduced
promoter methylation. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis
demonstrated high diagnostic accuracy, with area under the curve (AUC) values
exceeding 0.93 for all four genes. Increased OAS expression correlated with
advanced cancer stages and poor overall survival in breast cancer patients.
Functional analysis revealed their involvement in critical biological processes,
including immune modulation and oncogenic pathways. Silencing OAS genes in
breast cancer cells significantly inhibited cell proliferation and colony
formation, while unexpectedly enhancing migratory capacity. Additionally,
correlations with immune cell infiltration, molecular subtypes, and drug
sensitivity highlighted their potential roles in the tumor microenvironment and
therapeutic response.
CONCLUSION: The findings of this study established OAS family genes as potential
biomarkers and key players in breast cancer progression, offering promise as
diagnostic biomarkers and therapeutic targets to address unmet clinical needs.
BACKGROUND: Metastatic breast cancer especially in disseminated carcinomatosis
of bone marrow (DCBM) poses a life-threatening risk, often requiring systemic
chemotherapy. This situation lacks a cure, emphasizing symptom relief and
quality of life. The documented occurrence of DCBM is merely 0.17% in metastatic
breast cancer and ranges from 0.6 to 1.7% in solid tumors. Until now, there is
no official medical guideline for treating patients with luminal breast cancer
(LBC) who have DCBM. This case report highlights LBC patient with DCBM, treated
at diagnosis with first-line therapy combining endocrine therapy (ET) and a
CDK4/6 inhibitor.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 36-year-old premenopausal female of Javanese ethnicity with
advanced de novo luminal breast cancer diagnosed in 2020. The
immunohistochemistry showed estrogen receptor (ER)+ (90%), progesterone receptor
(PR)+ (20%), human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER-2) negative, and a
high Ki-67 staining result at 60%. The patient had visceral crisis, which
involved bone marrow infiltration and liver metastasis with preserved liver
function. After intolerance of side effects from first line treatment with
tamoxifen, the treatment plan was adjusted to letrozole, ribociclib, and
leuprorelin injection. After completing the sixth cycle of treatment, blood
parameters in the laboratory were found to have returned to normal. The
patient's response to this regimen was remarkable, with significant alleviation
of symptoms and improvement in quality of life observed.
CONCLUSION: Notably, the combined approach of ET and CDK4/6 inhibitor represents
a novel intervention in managing DCBM in patients with LBC.
BACKGROUND: Ductal carcinoma in-situ (DCIS) is a pre-invasive form of invasive
breast cancer (IBC). Due to improved breast cancer screening, it now accounts
for ~ 25% of all breast cancers. While the treatment success rates are over 90%,
this comes at the cost of considerable morbidity, considering that the majority
of DCIS never become invasive and our understanding of the molecular changes
occurring in DCIS that predispose to invasive disease is limited. The aim of
this study is to characterize molecular changes that occur in DCIS, with the
goal of improving DCIS risk stratification.
METHODS: We identified and obtained a total of 197 breast tissue samples from 5
institutions (93 DCIS progressors, 93 DCIS non-progressors, and 11 adjacent
normal breast tissues) that had at least 10-year follow-up. We isolated DNA and
RNA from archival tissue blocks and characterized genome-wide mRNA expression,
DNA methylation, DNA copy number variation, and RNA splicing variation.
RESULTS: We obtained all four genomic data sets in 122 of the 197 samples. Our
intrinsic expression subtype-stratified analyses identified multiple molecular
differences both between DCIS subtypes and between DCIS and IBC. While there was
heterogeneity in molecular signatures and outcomes within intrinsic subtypes,
several gene sets that differed significantly between progressing and
non-progressing DCIS were identified by Gene Set Enrichment Analysis.
CONCLUSION: DCIS is a molecularly highly heterogenous disease with variable
outcomes, and the molecular events determining DCIS disease progression remain
poorly defined. Our genome-wide multi-omic survey documents DCIS-associated
alterations and reveals molecular heterogeneity within the intrinsic DCIS
subtypes. Further studies investigating intrinsic subtype-stratified
characteristics and molecular signatures are needed to determine if these may be
exploitable for risk assessment and mitigation of DCIS progression. The highly
significant associations of specific gene sets with IBC progression revealed by
our Gene Set Enrichment Analysis may lend themselves to the development of a
prognostic molecular score, to be validated on independent DCIS cohorts.
BACKGROUND: The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has globally
impacted healthcare systems, delaying cancer screening, diagnosis, and
treatment. South Korea experienced a 3-month lockdown during the peak of the
pandemic, leading to postponements in breast cancer diagnosis and treatment.
Although the pandemic's severity has decreased, addressing the treatment gap
remains a concern.
METHODS: This retrospective cohort study included patients diagnosed with breast
cancer at five academic hospitals in South Korea during the pre-COVID (May-July
2019) and COVID (May-July 2020) periods. The primary endpoint was
recurrence-free survival (RFS), and secondary endpoints included overall
survival (OS), stage distribution, and age subgroup analyses.
RESULTS: Among 716 patients (374 pre-COVID, 342 COVID), the 3-year RFS was
significantly lower in the COVID group (88.3 vs. 89.7%, p = 0.030), while the
3-year OS was similar between groups (96.2 vs. 95.5%, p = 0.439). Age subgroup
analysis revealed a significant RFS difference in patients under 65 years of age
(p = 0.005) but not in those aged 65 years and older (p = 0.682). Stage
distribution did not differ significantly between groups (p = 0.531).
CONCLUSIONS: The COVID-19 pandemic adversely affected 3-year RFS, especially
among younger patients, despite no significant increase in advanced-stage
distribution. Timely cancer screening remains crucial for young patients with
fewer infectious disease complications.
BACKGROUND: Two surgical approaches have emerged for axillary staging in cN1
breast cancer patients after neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC): sentinel lymph node
biopsy (SLNB) and targeted axillary dissection (TAD). Direct comparisons of
technical and oncological outcomes with SLNB versus TAD are lacking.
METHODS: We routinely performed SLNB from 2017 to 2018 for cN1 breast cancer
patients who converted to cN0 after NAC, then adopted TAD from 2019 to 2022. To
minimize the false-negative rate (FNR), we required retrieval of ≥3 sentinel
lymph nodes (SLN) (2017-2018) or retrieval of the clipped node (CN) and ≥2 SLN
(2019-2022). In ypN0 cases meeting these criteria, axillary lymph node
dissection (ALND) was omitted. We compared the rate of per-protocol required
ALND due to technical failure of SLNB versus TAD and reported axillary
recurrence rates.
RESULTS: Among 191 cN1 ypN0 patients, 77 underwent SLNB and 114 underwent TAD.
The overall rate of required ALND due to technical failure was 14.7% and did not
differ between SLNB versus TAD (16.9% vs. 13.2%, p = 0.38). The most common
technical failure with SLNB was retrieving <3 SLN (10.4%); for TAD, it was not
retrieving the CN (7.1%). Median follow-up was 3.9 years for SLNB patients and
1.7 years for TAD patients; there were 1 (1.3%) and 0 (0.0%) axillary
recurrences, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Sentinel lymph node biopsy and TAD for cN1 patients after NAC
showed equivalent technical failure rates and low axillary recurrence rates.
When applying strict criteria to minimize FNR of axillary staging surgery,
approximately 15% of ypN0 patients may be overtreated with ALND.
BACKGROUND: Providing comprehensive and timely information during early breast
cancer treatment is crucial for informed decision-making and effective coping.
Healthcare providers must address these needs to enhance patient support and
improve outcomes.
DESIGN: A cross-sectional study was reported following the Strengthening the
Reporting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology (STROBE) guidelines.
METHODS: A total of 123 post-mastectomy patients were selected through purposive
sampling and completed the Thai version of the Sri Lankan Information Needs
Assessment Questionnaire-BC (SINAQ-BC). Direct associations between demographic
data and information needs were analysed descriptively, while bivariate analysis
and linear regression were used to identify significant predictors of
information needs.
RESULTS: The findings revealed that patients exhibited high overall information
needs (224.7/260.0), with the greatest demand focused on physical care,
treatment and diagnosis. In contrast, needs related to disease specifics and
psychosocial care were less prominent. A total of 94 respondents (76.4%)
expressed a particularly high demand for information regarding physical care.
Education level was identified as an influencing factor, accounting for 7.7% of
the variance in information needs among women with breast cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with higher education levels had significantly greater
information needs. Nursing staff should provide customised information packages
that are tailored to the participants' education levels. Further testing of the
Thai version of the SLINQ-BC would also be warranted.
IMPLICATIONS FOR PATIENT CARE: Patients are increasingly expected to manage
their own care even as medical treatment grows more complex and technical.
Nursing staff can contribute to the care of patients by being ready to evaluate,
monitor and address breast cancer patient's individual information needs in the
early stage of treatment based on factors such as educational level.
PATIENT OR PUBLIC CONTRIBUTION: No patient or public contribution because the
nature of the study's design, data analysis and writing did not require patient
or public contribution.
BACKGROUND: Spirituality is an important domain of well-being for cancer
survivors, yet we know little about the different trajectories of survivors'
spiritual well-being across the transition from active treatment to
survivorship. Further, the specific psychosocial resources and coping efforts
that might predict distinct trajectories of spiritual well-being have yet to be
identified.
AIMS: In this study, we characterized trajectories of survivors' spiritual
well-being (peace, meaning, faith) across the first year of survivorship and
examined whether social support and coping strategies predicted these
trajectories.
METHODS: Participants (N = 482) completed five surveys over the course of a year
following a diagnosis of breast (63.5%), prostate (25.7%), or colorectal cancer
(10.8%). We used latent class linear mixed modeling to identify spiritual
well-being trajectory classes (FACIT-Sp) and employed multinomial logistic
regression models to examine whether social support and specific coping styles
predicted class membership.
RESULTS: While the majority of our sample had moderate levels of spiritual
well-being, over one-third reported very low levels of peace. Distinct latent
classes for peace (four classes), meaning (five classes), and faith (five
classes) were identified among adult cancer survivors transitioning from
treatment to survivorship. Higher social support and adaptive coping predicted
greater likelihood of belonging to classes that maintained higher levels of
peace, meaning, and faith following cancer treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Cancer survivors show unique trajectories of spiritual well-being
as they transition from active treatment to survivorship. Social support and
coping may be important resources for maintaining spiritual well-being during
this critical transition period.
BACKGROUND: Lung metastasis remains the primary cause of tumor-related
mortality, with limited treatment options and unsatisfactory efficacy. In
preclinical studies, T helper 9 (TH9) cells have shown promise in treating solid
tumors. However, it is unclear whether TH9 cells can tackle more challenging
situations, such as established lung metastases. Moreover, comprehensive
exploration into the nuanced biological attributes of TH9 cells is imperative to
further unravel their therapeutic potential.
METHODS: We adoptively transferred TH1, TH9, and TH17 cells into subcutaneous,
in situ, and established lung metastases models of osteosarcoma and
triple-negative breast cancer, respectively, comparing their therapeutic
efficacy within each distinct model. We employed flow cytometry and an in vivo
imaging system to evaluate the accumulation patterns of TH1, TH9, and TH17 cells
in the lungs after transfusion. We conducted bulk RNA sequencing on in vitro
differentiated TH9 cells to elucidate the chemokine receptor CXCR4, which
governs their heightened pulmonary tropism relative to TH1 and TH17 cell
counterparts. Using Cd4 cre Cxcr4 flox/flox mice, we investigate the effects of
CXCR4 on the lung tropism of TH9 cells. We performed mass spectrometry to
identify the E3 ligase responsible for CXCR4 ubiquitination and elucidated the
mechanism governing CXCR4 expression within TH9 cellular milieu. Ultimately, we
analyzed the tumor immune composition after TH9 cell transfusion and evaluated
the therapeutic efficacy of adjunctive anti-programmed cell death protein-1
(PD-1) therapy in conjunction with TH9 cells.
RESULTS: In this study, we provide evidence that TH9 cells exhibit higher lung
tropism than TH1 and TH17 cells, thereby exhibiting exceptional efficacy in
combating established lung metastases. CXCR4-CXCL12 axis is responsible for lung
tropism of TH9 cells as ablating CXCR4 in CD4+ T cells reverses their lung
accumulation. Mechanistically, tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor
6 (TRAF6)-driven hyperactivation of NF-κB signaling in TH9 cells inhibited
ITCH-mediated ubiquitination of CXCR4, resulting in increased CXCR4 accumulation
and enhanced lung tropism of TH9 cells. Besides, TH9 cells' transfusion
significantly improved the immunosuppressed microenvironment. TH9 cells and
anti-PD-1 exhibit synergistic effects in tumor control.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings emphasized the innate lung tropism of TH9 cells driven
by the activation of TRAF6, which supports the potential of TH9 cells as a
promising therapy for established lung metastases.
BACKGROUND: Caring for a patient with metastatic breast cancer (mBC) can impose
a substantial burden and can lead to significant productivity losses. However,
the extent to which productivity loss impacts caregiver well-being has not been
well-elucidated. This study examined the relationship between productivity and
other characteristics with quality of life (QoL) to illuminate the multifaceted
challenges faced by caregivers in the context of mBC.
METHODS: We conducted a one-time, cross-sectional survey of 345 informal
caregivers of people living with mBC in the United States, United Kingdom, and
Germany in December 2021. Caregivers were asked about their QoL using the
Caregiver Quality of Life Index-Cancer (CQOLC) and pre-/post-caregiving
productivity impacts. Heterogeneity in reported burden was assessed across a
variety of caregiver characteristics.
RESULTS: One in three caregivers changed work status after onset of caregiving,
either reducing working hours (12 %), stopping work altogether (13 %), or
increasing working hours (8 %). Caregivers who reduced hours or stopped working
reported better QoL overall with total CQOLC scores of 71.8 and 65.3, compared
to those who maintained or increased work hours (CQOLC scores of 61.3 and 54.4,
respectively, [p < 0.001]). While there were no differences in caregiver QoL by
patients' disease status (p = 0.48), longer time spent caregiving was associated
with lower burden (p = 0.002).
CONCLUSIONS: Caregiver productivity and QoL scores indicate leaving the
workforce may ease the challenges associated with caregiving, suggesting a need
for workplace flexibility to better support caregivers. Our study emphasizes the
importance of supporting caregivers alongside patients, acknowledging caregiver
well-being can significantly influence patient outcomes.
POLICY SUMMARY: Although the burden associated with cancer caregiving has been
well-documented, policies supporting caregivers, such as flexible employment
leave and mental health support resources, are urgently needed to improve QoL
and health outcomes for both patients and their informal caregivers.
BACKGROUND: Adjuvant radiotherapy (RT) plays an essential role in the management
of early breast cancer (BC), but can lead to cardiovascular and lung toxicities.
RT in deep inspiration breath hold (DIBH) often allows better protection of
organs at risk. This prospective study compares surface-guided DIBH with free
breathing (FB) in patients with left-sided BC, by evaluating individual
cardiovascular risks and treatment plan dosimetry.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The study enrolled 585 patients from October 2016 to
January 2021 with left-sided invasive breast carcinoma with indicated adjuvant
RT of the breast/thoracic wall with or without regional lymph nodes. The ability
to hold breath for 20 s was a prerequisite. The treatments were either
hypofractionated (HF; 40.05 Gy/15Fx) or normofractionated (NF; 50.00 Gy/25Fx).
DIBH was applied using the automatically triggered surface guidance system
Catalyst with audio-video feedback. Computed tomography and surface data were
acquired during both DIBH and FB. The primary endpoint of the study was the
comparative evaluation of heart dose reduction using DIBH.
RESULTS: Plan dosimetry was significantly improved by DIBH. The mean and maximum
doses to the heart and the left coronary artery were significantly reduced by
36%-42% in HF and NF plans (P < 0.001), while the mean ipsilateral lung dose was
reduced by 12%-14% (P < 0.001). Furthermore, DIBH resulted in a 5% reduction in
the cumulative 10-year cardiovascular disease risk (10-year cardiovascular
disease risk) compared with FB (3.59% to 3.41%; P < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: To the best of our knowledge, this is the largest prospective study
showing better sparing for cardiac and ipsilateral lung doses with
surface-guided DIBH compared with FB in patients with left-sided BC.
BACKGROUND: In non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), patients with extrathoracic
metastases typically have a poor prognosis, with systemic chemotherapy being the
standard care. The full potential of primary resection therapy (PRT) in these
patients, especially during the immunotherapy era, is not fully established.
Additionally, the effectiveness of systemic preoperative therapy in this context
is unclear.
METHODS: This retrospective study identified NSCLC patients with extrathoracic
metastases from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) database
from 2010 to 2019. We compared the survival rates of those treated with just
chemotherapy vs those receiving both chemotherapy and PRT.
RESULTS: In a study of 41 909 patients with extrathoracic metastatic NSCLC
receiving chemotherapy, we found that adding PRT significantly increased overall
survival (median OS post-PSM: 18 months vs 11 months, P < 0.001). However, in
the immunotherapy era, its effectiveness was less pronounced (HR: 0.56 vs 0.7, P
for interaction = 0.011). For patients who have metastases to multiple distant
organs, combined distant organ and distant lymph node metastases, or lung
metastases, no additional survival benefit from PRT was observed (all P > 0.05).
Patients receiving systemic preoperative therapy before PRT had significantly
better outcomes than those who did not (HR = 0.69, P < 0.001). A predictive
nomogram was developed and validated, showing AUCs of 0.751 and 0.766 in the
training and test sets.
CONCLUSION: In both pre- and post-immunotherapy eras, patients with
extrathoracic metastatic NSCLC benefit more from adding primary tumor resection
to chemotherapy, especially those with preoperative systemic therapy. We created
a precise nomogram to identify the best candidates for PRT among patients with
extrathoracic NSCLC metastases.
BACKGROUND: Colon cancer is the third most common malignancy in Colombia, only
exceeded by prostate and breast cancers. It is the second most common cancer
among females and the third most common among males. The epidemiology of this
disease has changed in Colombia, and its peak incidence has now surpassed that
of gastric cancer.
AIMS: We aimed to determine the association between hospital surgical volume and
mortality in patients with colon cancer undergoing surgical resection in
Colombia.
METHODS: This was a national retrospective cohort study based on administrative
data and included adult patients undergoing surgical resection for colon cancer
who were enrolled in Colombia's contributory health system between 2012 and
2017. We defined exposure as the hospital's surgical volume where the colon
cancer surgery was performed. We classified the patients as exposed to a high
surgical volume (above the 90th percentile of the provider distribution) and a
low surgical volume (under the 90th percentile). The main outcomes were 30-day
and 1-year mortality. Multivariate Poisson regressions were used to identify the
association between exposure and mortality rates.
RESULTS: The study included 4,647 patients, of which 4,188 underwent surgery at
hospitals with a colectomy volume lower than 33 per year and 459 underwent
surgery at institutions with volumes equal to or higher than 33 per year. In the
multivariate analysis, after adjusting for observable variables, a lower risk of
30-day mortality was found in patients who underwent surgery at high surgical
volume institutions (relative risk - RR 0.57, 95% confidence interval - 95%CI
0.033-0.97). No differences were found in the one-year mortality.
CONCLUSION: The high surgical volume of a hospital is associated with a 30-day
mortality in colon cancer, as described in other studies, but the 1-year
mortality did not show this association. Prospective studies are required to
establish a causal relationship.
BACKGROUND: Capivasertib, a first-in-class AKT inhibitor, was recently approved
as a second-line treatment for advanced breast cancer. However, capivasertib is
expensive, raising questions over its economic value. This study provides the
first evidence on the cost effectiveness of adding capivasertib to endocrine
therapy (fulvestrant) for patients with PIK3CA/AKT1/PTEN-altered, hormone
receptor-positive (HR+) human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-negative
(HER2-) advanced breast cancer.
METHODS: A Markov model was built to compare the costs and effectiveness of
three treatment strategies. The first strategy involved adding capivasertib to
fulvestrant for all patients, while the second strategy involved adding it for
only postmenopausal women. The third strategy involved treatment with
fulvestrant alone. Analyses were conducted from a US payer perspective over a
lifetime horizon. Costs were measured in 2023 US dollars, and effectiveness was
measured in life years (LYs) and quality adjusted life years (QALYs), discounted
at 3% per year. One-way sensitivity analyses, probabilistic sensitivity
analyses, and scenario analyses were conducted to assess the robustness of
results.
RESULTS: The addition of capivasertib to fulvestrant for all patients was
associated with $410,765 higher costs and 1.46 additional quality adjusted life
years (QALYs) compared with fulvestrant alone, resulting in an incremental cost
effectiveness ratio of $280,854/QALY. The strategy of adding capivasertib for
only patients who are postmenopausal was extended dominated, i.e., yielded fewer
QALYs at a higher cost per QALY than if capivasertib was added for all patients.
These results were found to be robust in sensitivity and scenario analyses.
CONCLUSIONS: At its current price, our analysis suggests that the addition of
capivasertib to fulvestrant as a second line treatment is not cost effective
versus fulvestrant alone at a willingness-to-pay threshold of $100,000/QALY. The
price of capivasertib will need to be reduced by nearly 70% (to $7000 per cycle)
for it to become cost effective.
BACKGROUND: In Japan, despite 5 years since CGP tests were covered by insurance
in 2019, low drug accessibility rates remain a critical issue. We evaluated drug
accessibility in 3776 breast cancer from the C-CAT database using two criteria:
the proportion first linked to PMDA-approved drugs with phase III trial evidence
for breast cancer through CGP tests but not existing Companion diagnostics [CDx]
(*), and the proportion first linked to PMDA-approved drugs including based on
phase I and II trial evidence (**). Additionally, cases linked to
investigational drugs for non-PMDA-approved drugs were counted.
METHODS: We identified the top 100 genetic alterations in Japanese breast cancer
via CGP tests, listing corresponding drugs from C-CAT reports. Drug
accessibility was re-evaluated through simulations with updated evidence levels
by a member of the expert panel at Osaka University (EP-EL in OUH).
RESULTS: Results showed the proportion improved to 28.4% under the newest EP-EL
in OUH, including 3.4% for HER2-negative cases eligible for HER2-targeted
therapy due to ERBB2 amplification and 25.0% for ER-positive, HER2-negative
cases eligible for capivasertib-fulvestrant therapy due to PIK3CA, AKT1, and
PTEN alterations (*). However, in part, initial false negatives for HER2 status
and practical difficulties in using CGP tests as a CDx for capivasertib exist.
Including mutations like TMB-H, MSI-H, BRAF V600E mutation, and NTRK fusions
raised the proportion to 37.9% (**), but lacking drugs with phase III trials
evidence.
CONCLUSION: These findings highlight the ongoing difficulties in demonstrating
clear clinical utility of CGP tests in Japan, emphasizing the need for broad
discussions on its future direction.
BACKGROUND: To analyze in a prospective study the long-term safety and efficacy
of 3-dimensional conformal radiotherapy (3D-CRT) to deliver accelerated partial
breast irradiation (APBI) for Japanese women with early breast cancer.
METHODS: Breast cancer patients with pathological tumor size ≤ 3 cm,
age ≥ 20 years, lumpectomy with at least a 5 mm margin, and ≤ 3 positive
axillary nodes were eligible. APBI was delivered by 3D-CRT at a dose of 38.5 Gy
in 10 fractions over 10 days. The primary endpoints were the frequency and
severity of acute and late radiation toxicities, and secondary endpoints were
local control, survival, and cosmesis. The sample size was determined based on
the incidence of ≥ grade 3 acute and late radiation toxicities, which required
71 enrollments.
RESULTS: Between 2008 and 2010, 73 patients enrolled in this trial. Twelve
patients (16%) had 1-3 lymph node metastases. At a median follow-up of
12.6 years (range: 2.7-13.9 years), there were no cases of grade ≥ 3 acute or
late toxicity. There were 4 ipsilateral breast tumor recurrence (IBTR) events:
12-year IBTR incidence was 4.4%. The difference in the incidence of IBTR between
node-negative and node-positive patients was marginal (1.9% vs. 16.7%,
p = 0.055). The majority of patients (94.4% at 2 years, 89.3% at 10 years after
enrollment) had excellent/good cosmesis.
CONCLUSIONS: APBI delivered with 3D-CRT is a feasible treatment option for Asian
females, but it was indicated that node-positive status might increase IBTR
risk.
BACKGROUND: Polyamines play important roles in cell growth and proliferation.
Polyamine metabolism genes are dysregulated in various tumors. Some polyamine
metabolism genes are regulated by transcription factors. However, the
transcription factors that regulate polyamine metabolism genes have not been
completely identified. Additionally, whether any of the transcriptional
regulations depend on tumor heterogeneity and the tumor microenvironment has not
been investigated.
METHODS: We used bulk RNA-seq data to identify dysregulated polyamine metabolism
genes and their transcription factors across breast cancer subtypes. Genes
highly correlated with polyamine changes were obtained, and their
subtype-specific expressions were checked in tumor microenvironment cells using
single-cell RNA (scRNA)-seq data. Gene Ontology enrichment analysis was used to
explore their molecular functions and biological processes, and survival
analysis was used to examine the impact of these genes on therapeutic outcome.
RESULTS: We first analyzed the dysregulation of polyamine synthesis, catabolism,
and transport in four breast cancer subtypes. Genes such as AGMAT and CAV1 were
dysregulated across all subtypes, while APRT, SAT1, and other genes were
dysregulated in the more lethal subtypes. Among the dysregulated genes of
polyamine metabolism, we focused on three genes (SRM, APRT, and SAT1) and
identified their transcription factors (SPI1 and IRF1 correspond to SAT1, and
IRF3 corresponds to SRM and APRT). With scRNA-seq data, we verified that these
three transcription factors also regulated these three polyamine metabolism
genes in the tumor microenvironment. Both bulk RNA-seq and scRNA-seq data
indicated that these genes were specifically upregulated in high-risk breast
cancer subtypes, such as the basal-like type. High expression of these genes
corresponded to worse outcomes in the basal-like subtype under chemotherapy and
radiation treatment.
CONCLUSION: Our work identified three subtype-specific transcription factors
that regulate three polyamine metabolism genes in high-risk breast cancer
subtypes and the tumor microenvironment. Our results deepen the understanding of
the role of polyamine metabolism in breast cancer and may help the clinical
therapy of advanced breast cancer subtypes.
BACKGROUND: HER2-positive breast cancer is one of the high-risk subtypes of
breast cancer for which dual-targeted therapy has become an important treatment
option. However, for some patients, complete control of the disease is still not
possible and additional treatment is required. Pyrrolitinib, an inhibitor of ALK
and MET, has shown promising efficacy in breast cancer treatment. The aim of
this study was to investigate the feasibility of adjuvant intensive therapy with
pyrrolitinib in the treatment of HER2-positive breast cancer tumors.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Twenty-eight patients with HER2-positive breast cancer
who were treated at the Breast Surgery Department of the Provincial Hospital of
Weihai City, Shandong Province, China, between January 1, 2019, and January 1,
2023, were selected for this study. All of these patients received dual-targeted
therapy with the addition of pyrrolitinib therapy adjuvant intensive therapy. We
recorded data on the patients' basic information, pathological characteristics,
treatment regimens, effects of treatment regimens, and adverse reactions, and
statistically analyzed them.
RESULTS: Of the 28 patients with HER2-positive breast cancer, all of them were
added to adjuvant intensive therapy with pyrrolitinib. After examination of the
samples during treatment, the breast cancer mass had been significantly reduced
with the assistance of pyrrolitinib. In addition, no serious adverse reactions
were found.
CONCLUSION: Adjuvant intensification of pyrrolitinib in the treatment of
HER2-positive breast cancer tumors is feasible. The results of this study
suggest that pyrrolitinib is a safe and effective therapeutic option that can
significantly improve the outcome of HER2-positive breast cancer. More studies
are needed to further validate this finding.
BACKGROUND: Non-coding RNAs have received increasing attention in human tumors,
with RNA interaction networks playing important roles in breast cancer. This
study aims to explore novel circular RNAs and their mechanisms of biological
function in breast cancer.
METHODS: Six HER2-positive breast cancer tissues and paired normal tissues were
obtained for the whole transcriptome RNA sequencing. Differentially expressed
(DE) circRNAs, miRNAs and mRNAs were identified and Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment analyses of DERNAs were
performed. DECircRNAs- DEmiRNAs- DEmRNAs networks were constructed and further
verified by bioinformatics database analyses, luciferase assays and RIP assays.
The expression level of circDOCK1 in breast cancer specimens was measured using
qRT-PCR. Functional rescue experiments were conducted to explore the role of
circDOCK1/miR-138-5p/GRB7 axis in breast cancer cells. The correlation of
circDOCK1 expression and clinicopathologic features of 102 HER2 positive breast
cancer patients was analyzed.
RESULTS: A total of 6960 DEmRNAs, 133 DE miRNAs and 1691 DE circRNAs were
identified from HER2-positive breast cancer tissues and paracancerous tissues.
Enrichment Analysis showed that the differential mRNAs were associated with cell
division in biological processes and cell cycle and signaling pathways. GO and
KEGG analysis demonstrated that DE circRNAs were mainly enriched in
double-strand break repair, positive regulation of transcription by RNA
polymerase II, nucleoplasma, nucleus, chromatin binding and protein binding.
Forty networks of competing endogenous RNAs (ceRNAs) were constructed and
circDOCK1/miR-138-5p/GRB7 axis was verified. Functional experiments revealed
that the axis promotes migration and invasion of breast cancer cells. CircDOCK1
expression was elevated in breast cancer patients and correlated with adverse
clinicopathologic parameters. Patients with high circDOCK1 level had poor
outcomes.
CONCLUSION: A novel circDOCK1/miR-138-5p/GRB7 axis promotes HER2 positive breast
cancer metastasis and progression, providing a potential therapeutic target in
the treatment of breast cancer.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer, characterized by its heterogeneity, is a leading
cause of mortality among women. The study aims to develop a Machine
Learning-Derived Liquid-Liquid Phase Separation (MDLS) model to enhance the
prognostic accuracy and personalized treatment strategies for breast cancer
patients.
METHODS: The study employed ten machine learning algorithms to construct 108
algorithm combinations for the MDLS model. The robustness of the model was
evaluated using multi-omics and single-cell data across 14 breast cancer
cohorts, involving 9,723 patients. Genetic mutation, copy number alterations,
and single-cell RNA sequencing were analyzed to understand the molecular
mechanisms and predictive capabilities of the MDLS model. Immunotherapy targets
were predicted by evaluating immune cell infiltration and immune checkpoint
expression. Chemotherapy targets were identified through correlation analysis
and drug responsiveness prediction.
RESULTS: The MDLS model demonstrated superior prognostic power, with a mean
C-index of 0.649, outperforming 69 published signatures across ten cohorts.
High-MDLS patients exhibited higher tumor mutation burden and distinct genomic
alterations, including significant gene amplifications and deletions.
Single-cell analysis revealed higher MDLS activity in tumor-aneuploid cells and
identified key regulatory factors involved in MDLS progression. Cell-cell
communication analysis indicated stronger interactions in high-MDLS groups, and
immunotherapy response evaluation showed better outcomes for low-MDLS patients.
CONCLUSION: The MDLS model offers a robust and precise tool for predicting
breast cancer prognosis and tailoring personalized treatment strategies. Its
integration of multi-omics and machine learning highlights its potential
clinical applications, particularly in improving the effectiveness of
immunotherapy and identifying therapeutic targets for high-MDLS patients.
BACKGROUND: Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is associated with an
increased incidence of hepatic and extrahepatic cancers, in particular those
linked to obesity. In people with chronic liver disease, aspirin may confer
protection against hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). We explore the potential
chemoprotective effect of aspirin/other anti-platelet agents on obesity-related
cancers, including HCC in people with NAFLD.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective cohort study of anonymised electronic
medical records using the TriNetX network (Cambridge, MA, USA), a global
federated database. We identified adults aged 18 or over with a diagnosis of
NAFLD, prior to commencing antiplatelet agents. Two groups were created:
antiplatelet (1) versus no antiplatelet use (2). We propensity score matched for
nine variables. Antiplatelet use was defined as aspirin, ticagrelor, cangrelor,
clopidogrel or prasugrel use for at least 1 year. The outcomes of interest were
incidence of HCC and other obesity-related cancers. Follow-up was for 5 years.
We performed subgroup analyses on aspirin users only and stratified findings for
sex and age. Sensitivity analysis was conducted on individuals with 3- and
5-year aspirin exposure.
RESULTS: Post matching, there were 42,192 people per group. Antiplatelet use in
people with NAFLD was associated with statistically significant reduction in all
obesity-related cancers (HR 0.71, 95% CI 0.65-0.78, p < 0.001) and individually
for HCC (HR 0.52, 95% CI 0.40-0.68, p < 0.001), breast carcinoma (HR 0.78, 95%
CI 0.66-0.92, p = 0.003), pancreatic carcinoma (HR 0.61, 95% CI 0.47-0.78,
p < 0.001) and colorectal carcinoma (HR 0.68, 95% CI 0.56-0.84, p < 0.001). For
women, there was a significant reduction in risk of ovarian carcinoma (HR 0.75,
95% CI 0.57-0.98, p = 0.034). Aspirin monotherapy was similarly associated with
reduced incidence of HCC (HR 0.46, 95% CI 0.32-0.64, p < 0.001) and all
obesity-related cancers (HR 0.71, 95% CI, 0.56-0.90, p = 0.004), with benefits
observed in males (HR 0.71, 95% CI 0.56-0.90, p = 0.004), females (HR 0.77, 95%
CI 0.67-0.88, p < 0.001) and in older (HR 0.72, 95% CI 0.63-0.82, p < 0.001) but
not younger people (HR 0.78, 95% CI 0.60-1.03, p = 0.589).
CONCLUSIONS: Aspirin/antiplatelet agents may have a role in primary cancer
prevention in people living with NAFLD.
BACKGROUND: Disparities in breast cancer mortality persist despite improvements
in screening and therapeutic options. Understanding the impact of social
determinants of health on disparate breast cancer outcomes is challenging due to
heterogeneity of prior assessments. We examined the association between social
vulnerability and breast cancer stage at diagnosis and mortality using a
standardized measure of population risk for external stressors on health.
METHODS: Using institutional cancer registry data, female patients aged 18 or
older diagnosed with breast cancer between 2012 and 2019 were assigned a 2018
Social Vulnerability Index (SVI) rank based upon home address census tract. We
used multinomial logistic regression and Cox proportional hazards model to
examine the relationships between SVI and breast cancer stage at diagnosis and
all-cause mortality. Covariates included age and, when assessing mortality,
cancer stage, comorbidities, body mass index, insurance type, and treatment
regimen.
RESULTS: A total of 3,499 women with a median age of 59 (IQR 48-69) were
included. 60% were White and 31% were Black. Median SVI was 0.36 (IQR 0.14-0.68)
and median follow-up was 58 months (IQR 37.3-83.9). On adjusted analyses, each
decile increase in SVI resulted in an 11% (OR 1.11, 95% CI 1.06-1.16, p < .001)
and 15% (OR 1.15, 95% CI 1.09-1.21, p < .001) greater odds of presenting with
Stage III or IV breast cancer, respectively, compared to DCIS. For patients who
underwent surgery (N = 2916), each decile increase in SVI was associated with a
6% increase in all-cause mortality risk (HR 1.06, 95% CI 1.01-1.12, p = .01).
Mortality risk was 1.5 times (HR 1.52, 95% CI 1.02-2.26, p = .04) greater for
those in the most vulnerable quartile compared to the least vulnerable quartile.
CONCLUSIONS: Women living in socially vulnerable communities presented with more
advanced breast cancers and suffered worse survival. The SVI can be used to
identify patients at risk for delayed cancer presentation and increased
mortality. This tool can inform geographically targeted resource allocation and
interventions aimed at reducing breast cancer care disparities.
BACKGROUND: There are more than 4 million breast cancer survivors in the United
States. With continuing improvements in early detection and treatment, the
number of breast cancer survivors will only continue to increase. Breast cancer
survivors face a lifetime risk of long-term or late-effects from cancer
treatments, thus post-cancer treatment care, referred to as survivorship care,
is critical. Social determinants of health, including where a breast cancer
survivor lives, may impact cancer survivorship care. Our purpose was to evaluate
the relationship between rural/urban status and receipt of cancer survivorship
care and instructions for Missouri breast cancer survivors using state-level
data from a nationwide telephone survey-the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance
System (BRFSS).
METHODS: Missouri included the BRFSS Cancer Survivorship Module in 2014, 2016,
2018, and 2020. Module items ask cancer survivors about receipt of
a "post-cancer-treatment summary" and "follow-up instructions." We hypothesized
chances of receipt of both components would differ among four level Rural-Urban
Commuting Area (RUCA) Code groups (Rural, Small-Town, Micropolitan,
Metropolitan). Data from 430 breast cancer survivors over four survey years were
combined and grouped according to RUCA status. Using a logistic model with a
multilevel approach (after sampling weights calibration), the relationship
between receipt of survivorship instructions and RUCA group was examined.
RESULTS: 46% of Missouri breast cancer survivors reported receipt of complete
survivorship instructions. Compared to rural breast cancer survivors,
micropolitan breast cancer survivors had 5.9 times higher odds of receiving
survivorship instructions (p < 0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: Less than half of respondents reported receiving complete
post-cancer treatment instructions. More urban respondents were more likely to
receive instructions than their rural counterparts which raises questions about
the quality of post-treatment care between rural and urban survivors. A
sophisticated and purposeful approach to mitigating potential disparities is
warranted. Receipt of cancer survivorship care plans may be impacted by
rurality/urbanicity. Clinicians caring for cancer survivors living in rural or
urban settings must continue to be diligent with providing personalized
survivorship care.
BACKGROUND: As a common cause of cancer-related deaths in women, BRCA (breast
cancer) shows complexity and requires precise biomarkers and treatment methods.
This study delves into the molecular makeup of BRCA, focusing on immune
profiles, molecular subtypes, gene expression and single-cell analysis.
METHODS: XCell was used to assess immune infiltration based on TCGA (the Cancer
Genome Atlas) data and the clustering analysis was made. Differentially
expressed genes were examined in distinct clusters, and the WGCNA (weighted
correlation network analysis) was made to establish co-expression networks. The
prognostic models were developed by Cox and LASSO-Cox regression. The clustering
analysis, GSEA (Gene set enrichment analysis), GSVA (gene set variation
analysis) and communication analysis of the single-cell dataset GSE161529 were
performed to investigate the functional relevance. Real-time polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) was employed for evaluating gene expression.
RESULTS: The results revealed significant differences in immune cell
infiltration between two clusters (C1 and C2). C2 had poorer survival outcomes,
which was associated with higher expression of immune checkpoints PD1 and PD-L1.
The gene modules identified via WGCNA were correlated with the immune-based
subtypes. Then, a prognostic model comprising seven genes (ACSL1, ABCB5, XG,
ADH4, OPN4, NPR3, NLGN1) was used to divide patients into high- and low-risk
subgroups. The high-risk group had worse prognosis and higher scores of TIDE
(Tumor Immune Dysfunction and Exclusion). The single-cell analysis depicted the
immune landscape. Macrophages and endothelial cells exhibited higher AUCell
scores. In cellular communication analysis, notably significant ligand-receptor
interactions of HLA-DRA-> CD4 and TNFSF13B-> HLA-DPB1 were observed. The
proportion of endothelial cells was correlated with risk scores. Finally, RT-PCR
results illustrated the expression of seven genes in BRCA specimens.
CONCLUSION: The integrative analysis provides new insights into molecular
complexities of BRCA. Immune profiles and gene signatures hold potential for
improving stratification of BRCA patients and guiding the development of
personalized immunotherapy strategies.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer remains the most prevalent malignancy in women.
Chemotherapy is the primary systemic treatment modality, and the effectiveness
of treatment is often hampered by chemoresistance. Autophagy has been implicated
in promoting chemoresistance, as elevated autophagic flux supports tumor cell
survival under therapeutic stress. Since lysosomes are essential for the
completion of autophagy, their role in autophagy-related chemoresistance has
been insufficiently studied. This study aims to elucidate the role of the
lysosomal gene ATP6AP1 in promoting chemoresistance in breast cancer by
upregulating autophagic flux.
METHODS: Doxorubicin-induced cell death was assessed by cytotoxicity, flow
cytometry, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) release assays in various breast cancer
cell lines. Autophagic flux was assessed with western blot and the mRFP-GFP-LC3
fluorescence imaging. Breast cancer cells were infected with shRNA lentivirus
targeting ATP6AP1, allowing investigation its tole in doxorubicin-induced cell
death. ATP6AP1 expression and its association with prognosis were evaluated
using public databases and immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Doxorubicin-induced cell death in breast cancer cells is negatively
correlated with increased autophagic flux and lysosomal acidification. The
lysosomal gene ATP6AP1, which plays a role in autophagic processes, is
upregulated in breast cancer tissues. Knocking down ATP6AP1 reduces
autophagy-mediated doxorubicin resistance by inhibiting autophagic flux and
lysosomal acidification in breast cancer cells. Data analysis from public
databases and our cohort indicate that elevated ATP6AP1 expression correlates
with poor response to doxorubicin-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) and worse
prognosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Doxorubicin-induced cytotoxicity is associated with autophagy flux
in breast cancer. The lysosomal gene ATP6AP1 facilitates autolysosome
acidification and contributes to doxorubicin resistance in breast cancer.
BACKGROUND: Individuals with BRCA1/2 mutations have a notably higher than
average lifetime risk of developing cancer as adults. Some parents with BRCA1/2
mutations wish to share this information with their children, yet they struggle
to know how, when, and what information to share.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this review was to identify what communication
strategies/interventions exist for parents communicating their BRCA1/2 status to
their minor children, and what communication interventions do healthcare
professionals use to support parents' disclosure process.
METHODS: Scoping review on six databases search for studies with parents and/or
healthcare professionals' interventions on supporting communication from parents
to children. The review aligned PRISMA guidelines for scoping reviews and used
the PAGER recommendations to guide charting and reporting.
RESULTS: 22 articles published from 2001 to 2020 were included. Multiple
facilitators/motivators of disclosure, how and where parents disclosed,
reactions to disclosure were identified. Also, there were no healthcare
professionals' interventions in the disclosure process found.
CONCLUSIONS: The review summarizes research on parents' disclosure of their
BRCA1/2 status to their underage children and demonstrates a paucity of
communication interventions for guiding parents in this difficult process.
Parents experience many obstacles communicating the results to their children.
PRACTICE IMPLICATIONS: These findings equip healthcare professionals in their
efforts to develop and test interventions which support the communication of
genetic risk information. Furthermore, it is evident there is a need for more
research to understand how the disclosure process occurs in the families.
BACKGROUND: The adipose tissue may serve as a source of energy supporting cancer
growth and metastasis. Our understanding of the adipocytes which compose the
adipose tissue in different anatomical locations of the body as well as
potential microscopic tumor infiltration in patients with metastatic breast
cancer remains limited. This study therefore investigates regional variations in
adipocyte size and adipose tissue tumor infiltration in patients with metastatic
breast cancer.
METHODS: Within the UPTIDER rapid autopsy program, (NCT04531696), 94 adipose
tissue samples from subcutaneous, visceral, retroperitoneal, and mammary depots
of 22 patients with metastatic breast cancer were collected and analyzed.
Distant adipocyte size was quantified using digital pathology, and tumor
infiltration was assessed histologically. Linear mixed quantile regression
analyzed the associations between adipocyte size, fat depot type and major
histological subtypes.
RESULTS: Distant adipocyte size did not significantly differ across fat depots.
A trend towards smaller adipocytes in mammary fat at autopsy versus diagnosis
was observed, suggesting potential age and/or treatment effects. Adipocyte size
correlated positively with BMI at death, especially in subcutaneous and visceral
fat. Visceral fat exhibited higher tumor infiltration, notably in patients with
invasive lobular carcinoma (ILC).
CONCLUSION: This study highlights the relatively uniform adipocyte size across
fat depots in patients with metastatic breast cancer, with potential changes in
mammary adipocytes over the disease course. The microscopic tumor cell
infiltration observed in the visceral fat, mainly for ILC, underscores the need
to undertake additional research to understanding the contribution of the
adipose tissue in breast cancer metastasis.
BACKGROUND: Oncoplastic breast conserving surgery (OP-BCS) is becoming
increasingly popular to avoid mastectomy or optimize cosmetic outcomes of breast
conserving surgery (BCS). Few studies have compared clinical outcomes and
patient-reported outcomes (PROs) of OP-BCS to conventional BCS (C-BCS). This
study aims to compare clinical outcomes and short and long-term PROs after
OP-BCS and C-BCS in a large prospective breast cancer cohort.
METHODS: Women in the prospective, multicenter UMBRELLA-breast cancer cohort who
underwent OP-BCS or C-BCS were included. Clinical outcomes and PROs (measured by
EORTC QLQ-C30/BR23) up to 24 months postoperatively were evaluated. Mixed-model
analysis was performed to assess differences in PROs over time between groups.
RESULTS: 1628 (84.9%) patients received C-BCS and 290 (15.1%) OP-BCS. After
C-BCS and OP-BCS, free resection margins were obtained in 84.2% (n = 1370) and
86.2% (n = 250), respectively, reoperation for re-exision of margins <3 months
occurred in 5.3% (n = 86) and 4.8% (n = 14), median time interval from surgery
until adjuvant systemic therapy was 66 and 63 days, and 36 and 41 days until
radiotherapy. Shortly postoperative, OP-BCS was associated with statistically
significant lower mean scores for physical functioning (83.6 vs 87.2) and body
image (82.8 vs 89.4) and more pain (19.8 vs 26.5) and breast symptoms (22.7 vs
30.3) than C-BCS. Body image scores remained significantly less favorable after
OP-BSC than C-BCS up to 24 months postoperatively (87.8 vs 92.2).
CONCLUSIONS: Oncoplastic surgery safely enables BCS, but may lead to less
favorable long-term body image compared to C-BCS. These findings are important
for patient education and shared decision-making.
BACKGROUND: Patients receiving chemotherapy require ongoing symptom monitoring
and management to optimize their outcomes. In recent years, digital remote
monitoring interventions have emerged to provide enhanced cancer care delivery
experiences to patients and clinicians. However, patient and clinician
experiential evaluations of these technologies are rare. Therefore, we explored
user experiences and perceptions of one such intervention-Advanced Symptom
Management System (ASyMS)-after its scaled deployment in the context of the
Electronic Symptom Management System Remote Technology (eSMART) trial. The
eSMART trial was a large, multicenter randomized controlled trial to evaluate
the efficacy of ASyMS in 12 clinical sites in 5 European countries.
OBJECTIVE: In this qualitative study, both patients' and clinicians' experiences
of using ASyMS for up to 6 cycles of chemotherapy were explored to understand
the impact of ASyMS on patients' experiences, clinical practice, and supportive
care delivery.
METHODS: For this analysis, individual, semistructured, one-to-one interviews
with 29 patients with breast, colorectal, and hematological cancers and 18
clinicians from Austria, Greece, Ireland, Norway, and the United Kingdom were
conducted. Interviews focused on patients' and clinicians' experiences of using
ASyMS, care organization and changes in practice following the introduction of
ASyMS, perceived changes in care associated with the use of ASyMS, and its
potential for future integration into routine chemotherapy care pathways.
RESULTS: Thematic analysis identified several themes that describe patients' and
clinicians' experiences using ASyMS. One central orienting theme-ASyMS as a
facilitator of change-was supported by 5 key themes associated with human and
technology monitoring: reassurance, enhanced communications and relationships,
knowing what is "normal" and what is to be expected, enhancing cancer care
experiences, and informing future cancer care.
CONCLUSIONS: This study is the first to evaluate both patients' and clinicians'
experiences of using a digital health intervention to remotely monitor
chemotherapy symptoms across 5 countries. Experiences with ASyMS were positive
from both patients' and clinicians' perspectives, although some improvements to
support the wider-scale rollout and sustained implementation were identified.
Overall, this study demonstrates that real-time remote monitoring systems can
help patients feel more reassured during their chemotherapy treatments and can
help clinicians provide the right care, at the right time, and in the right
place.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT02356081;
https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT02356081.
BACKGROUND: Although common, the severity of the psychological symptom cluster
(PSC) (ie, co-occurrence of anxiety, depression, fatigue, sleep disturbance)
varies among women with breast cancer. In addition, the impact of various types
of stress and other risk factors on its severity are understudied, and the
influence of the PSC on quality of life (QOL) outcomes remains poorly
characterized.
OBJECTIVE: To identify subgroups of postmenopausal women with breast cancer with
distinct PSC severity profiles following surgery and evaluate whether these
subgroups differed in terms of demographic and clinical characteristics,
symptoms, social and posttraumatic stress, and QOL.
METHODS: Following surgery, 159 postmenopausal women with early-stage, hormone
receptor-positive breast cancer completed assessments of anxiety, depression,
fatigue, sleep disturbance, cognitive function, physical symptoms, stress, and
QOL. Latent profile analysis was used to identify subgroups of women based on
the severity of the prespecified PSC. Parametric and nonparametric tests were
used to evaluate for subgroup differences.
RESULTS: Three distinct PSC severity subgroups were identified (ie, Lower
[71.7%], Moderate [23.9%], Higher [4.4%]). Compared with the Lower subgroup, the
Moderate subgroup was less likely to have received prior radiation, and the
Moderate and Higher subgroups had worse perceived cognitive function, higher
symptom burden, higher posttraumatic stress, and lower QOL. Clinically relevant
sleep disturbance was common across PSC subgroups.
CONCLUSIONS: PSC severity is associated with higher posttraumatic stress and
poorer QOL following breast surgery. Sleep disturbance is a common problem and
may be undertreated.
IMPLICATIONS FOR PRACTICE: Assessments of posttraumatic stress and sleep
disturbance are needed for timely intervention.
BACKGROUND: A substantial portion of the genetic predisposition for breast
cancer is explained by multiple common genetic variants of relatively small
effect. A subset of these variants, which have been identified mostly in
individuals of European and Asian ancestry, have been combined to construct a
polygenic risk score (PRS) to predict breast cancer risk, but the prediction
accuracy of existing PRSs in Hispanic/Latinx individuals (H/L) remain relatively
low. We assessed the performance of several existing PRS panels with and without
addition of H/L specific variants among self-reported H/L women.
METHODS: PRS performance was evaluated using multivariable logistic regression
and the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC).
RESULTS: Both European and Asian PRSs performed worse in H/L samples compared to
original reports. The best European PRS performed better than the best Asian PRS
in pooled H/L samples. European PRSs had decreased performance with increasing
Indigenous American (IA) ancestry while Asian PRSs had increased performance
with increasing IA ancestry. The addition of 2 H/L SNPs increased performance
for all PRSs, most notably in the samples with high IA ancestry and did not
impact the performance of PRSs in individuals with lower IA ancestry.
CONCLUSIONS: A single PRS that incorporates risk variants relevant to the
multiple ancestral components of individuals from Latin America, instead of a
set of ancestry specific panels, could be used in clinical practice.
IMPACT: Results highlight the importance of population-specific discovery and
suggest a straightforward approach to integrate ancestry specific variants into
PRS for clinical application.
BACKGROUND: Effective breast cancer treatment planning requires balancing tumor
control while minimizing radiation exposure to healthy tissues. Choosing between
intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) and three-dimensional conformal
radiation therapy (3D-CRT) remains pivotal, influenced by patient anatomy and
dosimetric constraints.
PURPOSE: This study aims to develop a decision-making framework utilizing deep
learning to predict dose distributions, aiding in the selection of optimal
treatment techniques.
METHODS: A 2D U-Net convolutional neural network (CNN) model was used to predict
dose distribution maps and dose-volume histogram (DVH) metrics for breast cancer
patients undergoing IMRT and 3D-CRT. The model was trained and fine-tuned using
retrospective datasets from two medical centers, accounting for variations in CT
systems, dosimetric protocols, and clinical practices, over 346 patients. An
additional 30 consecutive patients were selected for external validation, where
both 3D-CRT and IMRT plans were manually created. To show the potential of the
approach, an independent medical physicist evaluated both dosimetric plans and
selected the most appropriate one based on applicable clinical criteria.
Confusion matrices were used to compare the decisions of the independent
observer with the historical decision and the proposed
decision-making framework.
RESULTS: Evaluation metrics, including dice similarity coefficients (DSC) and
DVH analyses, demonstrated high concordance between predicted and clinical dose
distribution for both IMRT and 3D-CRT techniques, especially for organs at risk
(OARs). The decision-making framework demonstrated high accuracy (90 % ), recall
(95.7 % ), and precision (91.7 % ) when compared to independent clinical
evaluations, while the historical decision-making had lower accuracy (50 % ),
recall (47.8 % ), and precision (78.6 % ).
CONCLUSIONS: The proposed decision-making model accurately predicts dose
distributions for both 3D-CRT and IMRT, ensuring reliable OAR dose estimation.
This decision-making framework significantly outperforms historical
decision-making, demonstrating higher accuracy, recall, and precision.
BACKGROUND: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a great challenge for
clinical management due to the high rate of metastatic recurrence and lack of
recognised therapeutic targets, while tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs)
infiltration in TNBC has been discovery provides an opportunity for
immunotherapy, and studies have suggested that the level of TILs infiltration is
positively correlated with TNBC survival. We found a rare case of TNBC with low
TILs infiltration but good prognosis, named Tall Cell Carcinoma with Reversed
Polarity (TCCRP), and we investigated it from the perspective of TILs
infiltration in order to improve the clinical data of TCCRP.
CASE PRESENTATION: a 54-year-old woman with a left breast mass, breast
ultrasound showed BI-RADS IVb, puncture diagnosis of invasive ductal carcinoma,
postoperative pathology showed papillary structure, cubic and high columnar
arrangement of cells, nuclei far away from the base, interstitial fibroplasia,
diagnosed as TCCRP. Immunohistochemistry revealed that the tumours were
triple-negative breast cancer (negative for ER, PR, and HER-2), with a low Ki-67
proliferation index. TILs were < 10%, with a small infiltration of CD4+ and CD8+
T lymphocytes, positive expression of SMA and FAP, and IDH2, PIK3CA gene
mutation. The patient underwent postoperative chemotherapy, 11 months follow-up,
no recurrence and metastasis.
CONCLUSION: TCCRP is a rare TNBC with inert biological behaviours and good
prognosis. We found low infiltration of TILs in the pathological tissue of this
case, which may be a characteristic of TCCRP, and the presence of
Cancer-Associated Fibroblasts (CAF) in the interstitium of the tumour in this
case may have suppressed the anti-tumour immunity to some extent, and further
studies on the immune characteristics of the tumour microenvironment (TME) in
TCCRP are needed.
BACKGROUND: CD73 is adenosine generation molecule, which is involved in the
immune regulation. However, the roles of CD73 in the tumor microenvironment
remain unknown.
METHODS: CD73 expression levels in pan-cancers were analyzed, based on The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) and Human Protein
ALTAS (HPA) databases. Kaplan-Meier (KM) plotter was used to analyze the
prognostic values of CD73. Immune scores in pan-cancers was evaluated by
ESTIMATE. TIMER2.0 and UCSCXena were used to explore the correlation between
CD73 and immune infiltration/immune checkpoints/tumor mutation burden
(TMB)/microsatellite instability (MSI). CD73 expression correlated genes in
tumor tissues were screened by using LinkedOmics tool.
RESULTS: Firstly, CD73 was significant increased in following cancer types:
esophageal carcinoma (ESCA), glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSC), brain lower grade glioma (LGG), lung
adenocarcinoma (LUAD), pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PAAD) and stomach
adenocarcinoma (STAD). Secondly, high CD73 expression was associated with poor
overall survival in patients with breast invasive carcinoma (BRCA), CESC, HNSC,
liver hepatocellular carcinoma (LIHC), LUAD, lung squamous cell carcinoma
(LUSC), PAAD and STAD. However, in KIRC and UCEC, patients high CD73 expression
showed a favorable prognosis. Thirdly, the immune scores of the high CD73
expression in bladder urothelial carcinoma (BLCA), BRCA, kidney chromophobe
(KICH), LUAD, LUSC, ovarian serous cystadenocarcinoma (OV), pheochromocytoma and
paraganglioma (PCPG), prostate adenocarcinoma (PRAD), and skin cutaneous
melanoma (SKCM) were significant higher than that of patients with low CD73
expression. Furthermore, we observed a positive correlation between CD73 and the
multiple immune cells infiltration, including CD4+ memory T cells, CD8+ T cells,
Treg cells, myeloid DC and macrophage, particularly in BRCA and LUAD. There was
no strong correlation between CD73 and TMB/MSI. In LUAD, CD73 expression
correlated genes were mainly enrichment in positive regulation of cell
proliferation, cell adhesion, positive regulation of kinase activity, cellular
response to LPS. However, in UCEC, CD73 correlated genes were mainly associated
with fatty acid omega-oxidation, protein localization to endoplasmic reticulum
exit site, endoplasmic reticulum to Golgi vesicle-mediated transport.
CONCLUSION: CD73 could be used to predict the prognosis of patients with several
cancers. The potential functional mechanism of CD73 involved in cancer progress
may not only dependent on its immunomodulatory effects.
BACKGROUND: Elevated evidence suggests that KIF20A plays an important role in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) progression. Nevertheless, the underlying
mechanism by which KIF20A promotes HCC cell growth are not well understood.
METHODS: Using TCGA-LIHC RNAseq and GEO datasets, we assessed the KIF20A
expression and patient survival in HCC and hepatitis B virus (HBV)-related HCC.
Mutant and CNV analysis were performed to evaluate the genetic alteration of
KIF20A in HCC. PPI network and GSEA enrichment was utilized for analyzing the
KIF20A-related genes and involved pathways in HCC. To further explore regulatory
mechanism in HBV-related HCC, PROMO prediction and luciferase reporter system
was utilized for verifying HBx/GATA2/KIF20A binding sites. CCK-8 and flow
cytometry were carried out to determine the regulation of GATA2-KIF20A on
HBV-related HCC cell proliferation and apoptosis.
RESULTS: KIF20A was significantly upregulated in pan-cancer (including HCC).
KIF20A mRNA level was a significant independent predictor of overall survival in
HBV-related HCC patients. Genetic alterations analysis revealed the copy number
gain and amplification triggered KIF20A upregulation in HCC. In addition, the
genes associated with KIF20A expression in HCC was enriched in PLK1 pathway and
cell cycle in HCC. HBx might indirectly binds to KIF20A promoter via regulating
GATA2. Additionally, transcription factor GATA2 directly binds to the promoter
region of KIF20A. Overexpression of GATA2 promotes HepG2.2.15 cell growth and
inhibits cell apoptosis via modulating KIF20A.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrated that HBx contributed to cell
proliferation by interacting with GATA2 and KIF20A in HBV-related HCC.
BACKGROUND: Mutations in SLC25A32 in humans cause late-onset exercise
intolerance, which is associated with various neurological and metabolic
diseases. However, its specific mechanism of action in tumour development is
poorly understood owing to the lack of multiomics integrated analysis of
SLC25A32 in pan-cancer.
METHODS: We used various analytical tools to comprehensively investigate the
transcription, protein level, and promoter methylation of SLC25A32. Furthermore,
the GSCA and cBioPortal databases were used to evaluate the inheritance impact
and epigenetic alterations of SLC25A32 in pan-cancer. SLC25A32 expression and
the prognostic significance of copy number alterations in multiple cancers were
compared using the UCSCXenaShiny and GEPIA2.0 platforms, and its specific
function in breast cancer was experimentally verified.
RESULTS: SLC25A32 is abnormally expressed at the transcriptional and protein
levels in most cancer types, with aberrant DNA promoter methylation and
significant gene amplification in most tumours. SLC25A32 is significantly
associated with the survival prognosis of some cancers, immune infiltrating
cells, tumour stemness, and immune-related markers. SLC25A32 knockdown decreased
breast tumour cell proliferation, invasion, and metastasis.
CONCLUSIONS: This study aimed to reveal SLC25A32 as a novel prognostic biomarker
for pan-cancer prediction and immunotherapy efficacy and specifically describes
its underlying mechanism of action in breast cancer. SLC25A32 is widely
differentially expressed in pan-cancer with prognostic significance and is
correlated with immune infiltration. Additionally, it can affect breast cancer
occurrence and development.
BACKGROUND: Lung cancer is a leading cause of death related to cancer worldwide,
surpassing the number of deaths caused by breast, colon and prostate cancers.
Objective of the study was to determine the frequency immunohistochemical
expression of PD-L1 in non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC). It was a
descriptive cross-sectional study, carried out at the Department of
Histopathology, Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, Rawalpindi, from January
2020 to July 2021.
METHODS: We inducted total of 145 diagnosed cases of NSCLC irrespective of age,
gender, histological grade and stage of carcinoma. Immunohistochemical staining
of PD-L1 was done using Leica kit. Patients with no expression for PD-L1 were
considered negative, whereas immunohistochemical expression of ≥1% is considered
positive. PD-L1 statuses of all patients was determined. The data was analyzed
by using SPSS version 25.
RESULTS: In our study age ranges from 31 to 85 years with mean age of
64.20±10.90 years. Out of the 145 patients, 126 (86.90%) were male and 19
(13.10%) were females. 108 (74.50%) were squamous cell carcinoma and 37 (25.50%)
were adenocarcinoma. Most of them were histological grade II, 88 (60.70%),
followed by grade I in 26 (17.9%). Immunohistochemical expression of PD-Ll in
NSCLC was found in 35 (24.13%) patients. Of all the positive cases, PD-L1
expression was slightly higher in adenocarcinoma 27.02% as compared to squamous
cell carcinoma 23.14%.
CONCLUSIONS: PD-L1 expression is associated with increased aggressiveness,
enhanced tumor progression and shorter survival in patients of NSCLC. This study
concluded that frequency of positive immunohistochemical expression of PD-L1 in
NSCLC is though low, yet significant in adenocarcinoma as compared to squamous
cell carcinoma.
BACKGROUND: Severe tricuspid regurgitation (TR) is associated with high
morbidity and mortality. Isolated TR, defined as TR without overt heart disease,
is typical and offers limited cardiac treatment options other than
interventional repair or replacement. Survival history of cancer or active
cancer treatment may lead to an unnecessary delay of TR treatment.
METHODS: We included all patients diagnosed with severe TR at the Medical
University of Vienna between 2003 and 2016 who had normal left ventricular
function and no other valvular lesions. Outcome analysis was performed on cancer
type, status and the number of organs affected by cancer.
RESULTS: A total of 973 patients were included. 182 (19%) patients had cancer,
52 were active and 130 had a history of cancer at the time of TR diagnosis.
Oncologic patients were divided into subgroups of gastrointestinal, skin,
glands, gynaecological, breast, urogenital, lung and other cancers. Ten-year
mortality of patients with cancer was higher than those without cancer
(p < 0.001). Multivariate analysis adjusting for age did not reveal
significantly higher mortality in patients with a history of cancer compared to
patients without cancer (p = 0.59). Patients with lung, active, or multi-organ
cancer showed the highest mortality.
CONCLUSIONS: Mortality in patients with severe isolated TR is high and increased
by active or multi-organ cancer but not by a history of cancer. These patients
should be discussed in interdisciplinary cardio-oncology teams to avoid delaying
life-saving treatment of TR and cancer.
BACKGROUND: The role of viruses in the development of breast cancer has been a
subject of debate and extensive research over the past few decades. Several
studies have examined the association between Bovine leukemia virus (BLV)
infection and the risk of developing breast cancer; however, their findings have
yielded inconsistent results. To address this uncertainty, the purpose of the
present study was to conduct a systematic review and meta-analysis to determine
any potential association between BLV and breast cancer.
METHODS: The literature search was performed by finding related articles from
PubMed, Web of Science, Scopus, EMBASE, and ScienceDirect databases. Statistical
analysis was conducted using the meta package in R Studio and Review Manager
5.1. The I2 test was used to assess between-study heterogeneity. The
Mantel-Haenszel method calculated the pooled odds ratio and its 95% confidence
interval. Studies were divided into subgroups for comparison.
RESULTS: The literature search identified a total of 17 studies that were deemed
suitable for inclusion in the systematic review. Out of these 17 studies, 12
were used in the subsequent meta-analysis. Combining the data from these
eligible studies, we calculated the pooled multi-factor adjusted odds ratio (OR)
and a 95% confidence interval (CI). Considering the heterogeneity observed
across the studies, the result obtained using the fixed effects model was 2.12
(1.77, 2.54). However, upon removing the six studies that contributed
significantly to the heterogeneity, the pooled OR with a 95% CI was recalculated
to be 3.92 (2.98, 5.16).
CONCLUSION: The result of this study suggests that BLV infection is
statistically associated with Breast cancer.
BACKGROUND: Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is the most aggressive subtype
of breast cancer. While PD-1 based immunotherapies overall have led to improved
treatment outcomes for this disease, a diverse response to frontline
chemotherapy and immunotherapy still exist in TNBC, highlighting the need for
more robust prognostic markers.
METHODS: Tumor-intrinsic immunotranscriptomics, serum cytokine profiling, and
tumor burden studies were conducted in two syngeneic mouse models to assess
differential effects in both the early-stage and metastatic setting.
Bioinformatic analyses of both early and metastatic TNBC patient data were
performed to assess if identified NF-κB-associated factors are associated with
improved patient clinical outcomes.
RESULTS: NF-κB signaling driven by lymphotoxin beta expression is associated
with tumor regression in TNBC mouse models. Furthermore, lymphotoxin beta
expression in patient TNBC cohorts is prognostic of improved survival outcomes.
CONCLUSIONS: This study highlights the potential role for NF-κB-associated
factors, specifically lymphotoxin beta to be used as prognostic markers in TNBC,
which could ultimately provide insight for improved targeted treatment
approaches in the clinic.
BACKGROUND: Cardiovascular disease (CVD) has become the leading cause of
competitive mortality in female breast cancer (BC). Regular aerobic exercise
(AE) has been widely accepted as an effective intervention to reduce
cardiovascular risk in a variety of different clinical conditions. This study is
aimed at evaluating the efficacy and safety of AE on cardiovascular risk factors
in female BC and assessing the quality of the synthesized evidence.
METHODS: We searched five English databases (Cochrane Library, PubMed, Embase,
Scopus, and Web of Science) from inception to January 2023. Randomized
controlled trials (RCTs) and cohort trials studying the effects of AE
intervention on cardiovascular disease risk in female breast cancer were
included. We used Stata 16 for data synthesis, Risk of Bias 2, and the
Newcastle-Ottawa Scale for methodological quality evaluation and assessed the
certainty of the synthesized evidence in the Grading of Recommendations,
Assessment, Development and Evaluations (GRADE) approach.
RESULTS: Forty RCTs and 6 cohort trials involving 44,877 BC patients showed AE
reduced the incidence of CVD events by 29.4% [risk ratio (RR) = 0.706, 95%
confidence interval (CI) (0.659, 0.757), low certainty] and coronary artery
disease events by 36% [RR = 0.640, 95% CI (0.561, 0.729), low certainty]. AE
improved LVEF, and reduced weight and hip circumference. The subgroup analysis
results showed that nonlinear AE increased VO2max by 5.354 ml·kg·min-1 [mean
difference (MD) = 5.354, 95% CI (2.645, 8.062), very low certainty] and reduced
fat mass by 4.256 kg [MD = 4.256, 95% CI (-3.839, -0.094), very low certainty].
While linear AE reduced low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) by 8.534
mg/dL [MD = -8.534, 95% CI (-15.511, -1.557), low certainty]. The sensitivity
analysis results showed that each trial did not affect the impact index of the
highly heterogeneous outcomes.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study indicates that AE has a positive effect in reducing
cardiovascular risk factors. The individualization principle of AE deserves more
attention in the future. This will provide new ideas to reduce CVD events and
improve the quality of life in female BC patients. However, further research on
AE in female BC should take into account long-term and well-designed
administration to draw definitive conclusions.
BACKGROUND: Significant advances have been made in targeted therapeutics and
systemic therapy regimens for breast cancer (BC) treatment over the past decade.
Tumour cells can however remain in the body, leading to locoregional relapse
and/or metastasis. Subtypes of BC have distinct prognostic effects and have been
linked to varying risks of early locoregional relapse and metastases, response
to treatment, and overall survival. Most Low- and middle-income countries
(LMICs) have no registries of BC locoregional relapse and metastasis.
METHODS: This study comprehensively reviewed, a 3-year retrospective
single-centre data of female BC visiting the Komfo Anokye Teaching Hospital
(KATH), Ghana to determine the prevalence of locoregional relapse and metastasis
across our patient population. Prevalence of metastasis among the various BC
subtypes was also determined.
RESULTS: Prevalence of BC locoregional relapse and metastasis were 3.4% and
47.6% respectively. For BC patients with documented locoregional relapse
(N = 36), 27.8% (CI = 15.8 - 44.0%) had relapse to the contralateral breast,
41.7% (CI = 27.1 - 57.8%) had relapse to the ipsilateral breast, and 30.6%
(CI = 18.0 - 46.9%) had relapse to regional lymph nodes. For BC patients with
documented metastasis (N = 503), 151 (30%) had multiple organs involvement, 141
(28%) had lung metastases, 80 (16%) had bone metastases, 45 (9%) had liver
metastases, 16 (3%) had brain metastases and 70 (14%) had other metastases
(ovary, uterus, spleen, peritoneum, or distant lymph nodes). Basal subtype was
the most common subtype (n = 82, 41%), followed by Luminal A (n = 69, 34.5%),
HER2+ (n = 37, 18.5%) and Luminal B (n = 12, 6%). Basal subtypes had the most
metastasis (35%), with multiple metastasis being the most prevalent (13%).
CONCLUSION: Close to half of the patients (46%) presented with metastatic BC. BC
subtypes could influence the specific metastatic site. The most common BC
subtype was the Basal subtype and had the most metastases (35%), with multiple
metastasis being the most prevalent (13%). These findings should serve as a
guide in the management of patients to enhance early prediction and detection of
locoregional relapse and metastasis for improved overall treatment outcomes.
BACKGROUND: This study aims to identify factors predicting recurrence and
unfavorable prognosis in cN+ patients who have undergone sentinel lymph node
biopsy (SLNB) following neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC).
METHODS: The retrospective multi-centre "MF18-02" and the prospective
multi-centre cohort registry trial "MF18-03" (NCT04250129) included patients
with cT1-4N1-3M0 with SLNB+/- axillary lymph node dissection (ALND) post-NAC.
RESULTS: A total of 2407 cN+ patients, who later achieved cN0 status after NAC
and subsequently underwent SLNB, were studied. The majority had cT1-2 (79.1%)
and N1 (80.7%). After a median follow-up time of 41 months, the rates of
locoregional recurrence and axillary recurrence (AR) were 1.83% and 0.37%,
respectively. No significant difference in locoregional recurrence or AR rates
was observed between the SLNB/targeted axillary dissection-only (n = 1470) and
ALND (n = 937) groups. Factors significantly linked with AR included age younger
than 45 years, nonpathological complete response (non-pCR) in the breast, and
nonluminal pathology. Locoregional recurrences were associated with nonluminal
or HER2(+) pathology, non-pCR in the breast, and ALND. Poor prognostic factors
for disease-free survival (DFS) included having cT3-T4, no breast pCR (non-pCR),
ypN(+), and nonluminal pathology. No significant difference was found in DFS or
disease-specific survival (DSS) rates among ypN0, ypN-isolated tumour cells,
ypNmic, and ypN1. However, significant decreases in DFS and DSS rates were
observed when comparing ypN2 or ypN3 disease with ypN0.
CONCLUSIONS: The present large registry data indicate that younger patients
(<45), those with nonluminal pathology, and those who only partially respond in
the breast are more susceptible to axillary and locoregional recurrences.
BACKGROUND: Breast and prostate tumors are known to be less responsive to immune
checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs). Tissue-based tumor mutation burden (tTMB) has
emerged as a predictive biomarker of response to ICIs, including in these "cold
tumors". In clinical practice, when tTMB is not available, blood-based TMB score
(bTMB) can be used to consider treatment with ICIs.
METHODS: This retrospective, real-world study included a final cohort of
metastatic breast and prostate cancer patients treated with an ICI following a
liquid biopsy test. Multiple bTMB-High cut-offs were assessed. Clinical,
genomic, and outcomes data were collected. We hypothesized that a cut-off of
bTMB ≥10 mut/Mb is not a strong predictor of response to ICIs in this setting.
The Guardant Health genomic database (GHGD) was then queried (N = 13,992) for
associations of bTMB with genomic alterations.
RESULTS: In the clinical cohort (N = 48), ICI treatment is offered after a
median of 3 (1-9) lines of treatment. The median bTMB is 16.4 (10-186) mut/Mb.
The median time on ICI and PFS is 2.1 (0-1.7) and 3.1 months (95%CI, 1.6-4.6)
respectively; no difference by MSI/MMR status (p = 0.152). Response rate among
eligible patients (n = 36) is 16.7%; only N = 1/6 in bTMB <16 mut/Mb. High bMSI
is associated with higher bTMB (correlation test, r = 0.66, p = 0.000). In the
GHGD, patients with bTMB high have significantly more alterations than bTMB low
and TP53, PIK3CA, ATM, ESR1, NF1, BRCA2, ARID1A, and APC were the most
frequently altered genes.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, the practice of offering an ICIs based on bTMB was
uncommon and did not independently predict ICI benefits in patients with
refractory, advanced breast and prostate cancers.
BACKGROUND: Conventional axillary lymph node dissection (ALND) is associated
with significant post-operative morbidity in patients undergoing breast surgery
due to increased lymphatic leakage. LigaSure, an electrothermal bipolar vessel
sealing system, provides better closure of the leakage. This study aims to
compare the efficacy and safety of LigaSure against conventional techniques in
patients with breast cancer underwent ALND and breast surgery.
METHODS: We conducted a comprehensive search across the databases to identify
relevant studies. The search results were imported into Covidence for article
eligibility screening, and all relevant outcomes data were synthesized using odd
ratios (ORs) or standardized mean differences (SMDs) with 95% confidence
intervals (CIs) in meta-analysis models using RevMan 5.4.
RESULTS: Twelve studies with the total of 895 patients (LigaSure = 441;
Conventional technique = 454) with breast cancer underwent breast surgery with
ALND were included. LigaSure was associated with significantly lower
post-operative drain volume (SMD: -0.39, 95% CI [-0.53, -0.24], P < 0.00001),
shortened duration of drain (SMD: -0.51, 95% CI [-0.67, -0.34], P < 0.00001),
and reduced hospital stay length (SMD: -0.57, 95% CI [-0.96, -0.18], P = 0.004)
compared to conventional techniques. However, no difference observed in total
operation time, intra-operative blood loss, seroma related outcomes and
post-operative complications between the two groups.
CONCLUSION: LigaSure significantly reduced the lymphorrhea, duration of drain
and hospital stay, however, it did not prove be effective in seroma-related
outcomes.
BACKGROUND: Accounting for race and ethnicity in estimating disease risk may
improve the accuracy of predictions but may also encourage a racialized view of
medicine.
OBJECTIVE: To present a decision analytic framework for considering the
potential benefits of race-aware over race-unaware risk predictions, using
cardiovascular disease, breast cancer, and lung cancer as case studies.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional study.
SETTING: NHANES (National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey), 2011 to
2018, and NLST (National Lung Screening Trial), 2002 to 2004.
PATIENTS: U.S. adults.
MEASUREMENTS: Starting with risk predictions from clinically recommended
race-aware models, the researchers generated race-unaware predictions via
statistical marginalization. They then estimated the utility gains of the
race-aware over the race-unaware models, based on a simple utility function that
assumes constant costs of screening and constant benefits of disease detection.
RESULTS: The race-unaware predictions were substantially miscalibrated across
racial and ethnic groups compared with the race-aware predictions as the
benchmark. However, the clinical net benefit at the population level of
race-aware predictions over race-unaware predictions was smaller than expected.
This result stems from 2 empirical patterns: First, across all 3 diseases, 95%
or more of individuals would receive the same decision regardless of whether
race and ethnicity are included in risk models; second, for those who receive
different decisions, the net benefit of screening or treatment is relatively
small because these patients have disease risks close to the decision threshold
(that is, the theoretical "point of indifference"). When used to inform
rationing, race-aware models may have a more substantial net benefit.
LIMITATIONS: For illustrative purposes, the race-aware models were assumed to
yield accurate estimates of risk given the input variables. The researchers used
a simplified approach to generate race-unaware risk predictions from the
race-aware models and a simple utility function to compare models.
CONCLUSION: The analysis highlights the importance of foregrounding changes in
decisions and utility when evaluating the potential benefit of using race and
ethnicity to estimate disease risk.
PRIMARY FUNDING SOURCE: The Greenwall Foundation.
BACKGROUND: Whether COVID-19 is associated with a change in risk perception
about other health conditions is unknown. Because COVID-19 occurred during a
breast cancer study, we evaluated the effect of COVID-19 risk perception on
women's breast cancer risk perception.
OBJECTIVE: This study aims to evaluate the relationship between perceived risk
of COVID-19 and change in perceived breast cancer risk. We hypothesized that
women who perceived greater COVID-19 risk would evidence increased perceived
breast cancer risk and this risk would relate to increased anxiety and missed
cancer screening.
METHODS: Women aged 40-74 years with no breast cancer history were enrolled in a
US breast cancer prevention trial in outpatient settings. They had provided
breast cancer risk perception and general anxiety before COVID-19. We performed
a prospective observational study of the relationship between the perceived risk
of COVID-19 and the change in perceived breast cancer risk compared to before
the pandemic. Each woman was surveyed up to 4 times about COVID-19 and breast
cancer risk perception, general anxiety, and missed medical care early in
COVID-19 (May to December 2020).
RESULTS: Among 13,002 women who completed a survey, compared to before COVID-19,
anxiety was higher during COVID-19 (mean T score 53.5 vs 49.7 before COVID-19;
difference 3.8, 95% CI 3.6-4.0; P<.001) and directly related to perceived
COVID-19 risk. In survey wave 1, anxiety increased by 2.3 T score points for
women with very low perceived COVID-19 risk and 5.2 points for those with
moderately or very high perceived COVID-19 risk. Despite no overall difference
in breast cancer risk perception (mean 32.5% vs 32.5% before COVID-19;
difference 0.24, 95% CI -0.47 to 0.52; P=.93), there was a direct relationship
between change in perceived breast cancer risk with COVID-19 risk perception,
ranging in survey wave 4 from a 2.4% decrease in breast cancer risk perception
for those with very low COVID-19 risk perception to a 3.4% increase for women
with moderately to very high COVID-19 risk perception. This was not explained by
the change in anxiety or missed cancer screening. After adjustment for age,
race, education, and survey wave, compared to women with very low perceived
COVID-19 risk, perceived breast cancer risk increased by 1.54% (95% CI
0.75%-2.33%; P<.001), 4.28% (95% CI 3.30%-5.25%; P<.001), and 3.67% (95% CI
1.94%-5.40%; P<.001) for women with moderately low, neither high nor low, and
moderately or very high perceived COVID-19 risk, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Low perceived COVID-19 risk was associated with reduced perceived
breast cancer risk, and higher levels of perceived COVID-19 risk were associated
with increased perceived breast cancer risk. This natural experiment suggests
that a threat such as COVID-19 may have implications beyond the pandemic.
Preventive health behaviors related to perceived risk may need attention as
COVID-19 becomes endemic.
BACKGROUND: Delays in breast cancer diagnosis and treatment lead to worse
survival and quality of life. Racial disparities in care timeliness have been
reported, but few studies have examined access at multiple points along the care
continuum (diagnosis, treatment initiation, treatment duration, and genomic
testing).
METHODS AND FINDINGS: The Carolina Breast Cancer Study (CBCS) Phase 3 is a
population-based, case-only cohort (n = 2,998, 50% black) of patients with
invasive breast cancer diagnoses (2008 to 2013). We used latent class analysis
(LCA) to group participants based on patterns of factors within 3 separate
domains: socioeconomic status ("SES"), "care barriers," and "care use." These
classes were evaluated in association with delayed diagnosis (approximated with
stages III-IV at diagnosis), delayed treatment initiation (more than 30 days
between diagnosis and first treatment), prolonged treatment duration (time
between first and last treatment-by treatment modality), and receipt of
OncotypeDx genomic testing (evaluated among patients with early stage, ER+
(estrogen receptor-positive), HER2- (human epidermal growth factor receptor
2-negative) disease). Associations were evaluated using adjusted linear-risk
regression to estimate relative frequency differences (RFDs) with 95% confidence
intervals (CIs). Delayed diagnosis models were adjusted for age; delayed and
prolonged treatment models were adjusted for age and tumor size, stage, and
grade at diagnosis; and OncotypeDx models were adjusted for age and tumor size
and grade. Overall, 18% of CBCS participants had late stage/delayed diagnosis,
35% had delayed treatment initiation, 48% had prolonged treatment duration, and
62% were not OncotypeDx tested. Black women had higher prevalence for each
outcome. We identified 3 latent classes for SES ("high SES," "moderate SES," and
"low SES"), 2 classes for care barriers ("few barriers," "more barriers"), and 5
classes for care use ("short travel/high preventive care," "short travel/low
preventive care," "medium travel," "variable travel," and "long travel") in
which travel is defined by estimated road driving time. Low SES and more
barriers to care were associated with greater frequency of delayed diagnosis
(RFDadj = 5.5%, 95% CI [2.4, 8.5]; RFDadj = 6.7%, 95% CI [2.8,10.7],
respectively) and prolonged treatment (RFDadj = 9.7%, 95% CI [4.8 to 14.6];
RFDadj = 7.3%, 95% CI [2.4 to 12.2], respectively). Variable travel (short
travel to diagnosis but long travel to surgery) was associated with delayed
treatment in the entire study population (RFDadj = 10.7%, 95% CI [2.7 to 18.8])
compared to the short travel, high use referent group. Long travel to both
diagnosis and surgery was associated with delayed treatment only among black
women. The main limitations of this work were inability to make inferences about
causal effects of individual variables that formed the latent classes, reliance
on self-reported socioeconomic and healthcare history information, and
generalizability outside of North Carolina, United States of America.
CONCLUSIONS: Black patients face more frequent delays throughout the care
continuum, likely stemming from different types of access barriers at key
junctures. Improving breast cancer care access will require intervention on
multiple aspects of SES and healthcare access.
BACKGROUND: Perineural tumor spread (PNTS) to the brachial plexus (BP) is a rare
and challenging condition. This study aimed to elucidate the clinical
presentations, diagnostic challenges, and outcomes of patients with PNTS to the
BACKGROUND: In patients with cancer, the choice of an appropriate venous access
device is crucial for effective treatment, minimizing complications, and
reducing healthcare costs. Key management decisions, such as the timing of
device removal post-therapy, can impact clinical outcomes. As current
international guidelines lack specific directives for these issues, a global
consensus of experts, representing different countries, was deemed appropriate.
METHODS: A panel of 11 experts from three continents, including oncologists and
healthcare professionals, was chosen. After a comprehensive review of clinical
trials and guidelines on central venous access devices (CVAD) in oncology
published between January 2013 and December 2023, the panel developed and voted
on specific recommendations for the selection and management of CVADs in
patients with cancer, during a 2-day meeting.
RESULTS: The panel reached consensus on 10 issues concerning (a) indications for
a CVAD, (b) available options for CVADs, (c) role of the staff and patients in
the choice of CVAD, (d) factors influencing the selection of a port over an
external catheter, (e) logistical requirements for port and external catheter
insertion, (f) stakeholders responsible for port and external catheter
insertion, (g) factors determining the removal of a port after completing the
definitive therapy, and (h) recommended frequency of flushing when the CVAD is
not in use.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of the consensus may offer healthcare professionals a
global view of some critical issues concerning CVADs for cancer therapy, helping
to establish recommendations for local clinical practice.
BACKGROUND: Cancer data registries are central elements of cancer control
programs providing critical insights in measures of performance in cancer
healthcare delivery. Evidence to practice gaps in cancer care remain
substantial. Implementation science (IS) strategies target gaps between
generated research evidence and guideline concordance in delivered healthcare.
We performed a systematic review of the utilisation and effectiveness of IS
strategies reported by cancer registries.
METHODS: A research protocol and literature search were performed seeking
studies incorporating implementation strategies utilised by cancer registries
for quality improvement. Searches were undertaken in MEDLINE, Embase, CENTRAL,
and the grey literature for randomised trials and observational studies. The
"Knowledge to Action" (K2A) framework was used to explore implementation gaps in
care delivery.
RESULTS: Screening identified 1496 studies, 37 studies identified by title and
abstract review, and 9 included for full text review. Studies originated from
the United Kingdom, the United States, the Netherlands, and Australia reporting
on lung, breast, colo-rectal, and cancer clusters. Registry jurisdictions
included 7 national, 4 state, and 4 local registries. Knowledge gap analysis
consistently identified monitoring and evaluation of data outcomes in accord
with registry primary purpose although limited exploration of the utilisation,
translation and re-application of this data. Studies lacked description of
strategies describing sustainability of generated knowledge, identification of
barriers, knowledge adaptation to local contexts, and the selection, adaptation
and implementation of interventions for improvement.
CONCLUSION: Available studies provide limited literature evidence of the
effective utilisation of IS strategies reported by cancer registries for
healthcare improvement. A substantial opportunity presents to study the
engagement of IS in cancer registry data use to close the evidence practice gap
and facilitate data driven improvement in cancer healthcare.
BACKGROUND: Oral candidiasis is the most common infection of oral mucosa caused
by Candida albicans. A common predisposing factor for candidiasis is immune
system suppression in specific diseases such as AIDS and various cancers. This
study aimed to analyze the effect of Kefir probiotic products on the count of C.
Albicans in the saliva of chemotherapy patients.
METHODS: In this single-blinded clinical trial, 50 patients were selected who
have signed informed consent forms. Patients aged 20-60 years with colon or
breast cancer who received the same chemotherapy regimen were included and those
with a history of radiation therapy, underlying diseases, using antibiotics,
anti-fungal and GCSF medicines were excluded. Matched patients in test and
control groups received 100 ccs Kefir probiotic and mineral water, respectively
at a specific daily time for five weeks. Blood and saliva samples were collected
in five steps. Data were analyzed using SPSS Version 21 and the significance
level was set at p< 0.05.
RESULTS: In saliva samples, the count of C. Albicans in the test group dropped
significantly (p<0.05), while there were no significant differences between test
and control groups in blood samples (p>0.05). Comparing the follow-up sessions,
in the test groups, WBC and Neutrophil, and in the control groups, WBC count and
hematocrit showed significant differences (p< 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Based on the results, using probiotic products daily over a
short-term period drops the count of oral C. Albicans. Therefore, Kefir
probiotic products can be used as an additional treatment for chemotherapy
patients.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer management depends on molecular subtypes. The aim was
to compare disease-free survival (DFS) among the different subgroups. Overall
survival (OS) is a secondary endpoint.
METHODS: This cross-sectional study was done on breast cancer women that were
treated in our center, from 2009 to 2015. Breast cancer molecular subtypes were
determined based on clinicopathological criteria recommended by St Gallen and
include; luminal A, luminal B Her- 2-neu positive, luminal B Her-2-neu negative,
Her-2 enriched and triple negative. Patients with metastasis at diagnosis or
those without follow-up were excluded. Patients were followed-up from 12 to 132
months. Cox regression analysis was used for analogy of DFS and OS between the
subgroups.
RESULTS: Out of three hundred patients, 221 were enrolled with median age of 47
years old (26 to 83). Luminal B, Her-2 negative was the most common subgroup
with 83 patients (35.5%). Five and 10 years PFS were 95% and 81% for luminal A,
were 95.5% and 92% for luminal B Her-2 positive, were 92% and 91% for luminal B
Her-2 negative, were both 84% for triple negative and were 76% and 74% for Her-2
enriched subgroups, respectively. With multivariate analysis, the stage of tumor
(HR=5.9 CI=1.06-32.69) and triple negative subgroup (HR=5.2 CI=1.33-20.31) were
independent factors for recurrence.
CONCLUSION: Based on the results of this study, the triple-negative breast
cancer and possibly Her-2 enriched subgroup have a shorter DFS than luminal
breast cancers. Also, the stage of tumor is an independent factor for
recurrence.
BACKGROUND: Drugs used in chemotherapy specifically target and kill the cancer
cells during the breast cancer treatment. However, the majority of anti-cancer
therapies are non-specific, which will harm the innate cells. Our research work
assessed the impact of chemotherapy with adriamycin/cytoxan (AC) on the
influence of antioxidant enzymes and hematopathological profiles in the
diagnosis and prognosis of breast cancer treated with chemotherapy.
METHODS: 40 breast cancer patients treated with AC chemotherapy (Adriamycin 60
mg/m2, Cytoxan 600 mg/m2) between July 2020 and March 2021 are part of this
prospective study. The first sample was taken prior to chemotherapy, the second
after the intervention's three cycles, and the third after the intervention's
last cycle. Spectrophotometric technique was used to evaluate the amounts of
antioxidant enzymes in serum samples. Patients' demographic variables, clinical
features, biochemical andhematogical parameters data were noted. The data was
compared before and after treatment using the Paired-t test.
RESULTS: 55% of the patients were detected with carcinoma on left breast and
majority was in Grade 3 clinical stage 37.5%. Most of the patients express
estrogen and progesterone receptors 72.5%. Our findings demonstrated that a
significant decrease in the mean values of antioxidant enzymes MDA, NO, TAS,
CAT, GPx, GR, SOD and GST along with hematological parameters after three cycles
of AC treatment in breast carcinoma individuals. The p-value is < 0.05.
CONCLUSION: Our research demonstrates that the body's oxidant/antioxidant
system, particularly reduction levels and antioxidant enzyme activity, is
drastically altered by AC chemotherapy in breast carcinoma individuals.
BACKGROUND: Pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP) 38 is an
endogenous neuropeptide with diverse functions, notably its critical role in
inhibiting tumor proliferation. Radiotherapy is an important step in the
standard treatment modality of many tumors. Combining radiotherapy with
therapeutic agents represents a new and promising trend aimed at enhancing
radiation sensitivity and improving tumor treatment efficacy. However, the
efficacy of PACAP38 combined with radiotherapy on tumors has not yet been
studied.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to investigate the impact of PACAP38, both
independently and in combination with irradiation, on glioma and breast cancer
cells, while elucidating the underlying mechanisms involved.
METHODS: We investigated the impact of PACAP38 independently and combined it
with irradiation on glioma and breast cancer cells in vitro through cell
counting kit-8, clonogenic formation, Edu assays, and in vivo through a
xenograft tumor model. We further explored the molecular mechanisms underlying
the inhibitory effects of PACAP38 on tumors using RNA sequencing, western
blotting assay, immunohistochemistry, and immunofluorescence analysis. Further
investigation of gene function and the downstream mechanism was carried out
through small interfering RNA and overexpression lentivirus targeting the
SRY-related high-mobility group box 6 (SOX6) gene and western blotting assay.
RESULTS: Our findings revealed that PACAP38 could effectively synergize with
radiation to suppress the proliferation of glioma and breast cancer cells in
vivo and in vitro. Molecular studies revealed that the inhibitory effect of
PACAP38 on tumor cell proliferation was mediated by upregulating SOX6 protein
expression through histone acetylation, thereby inhibiting the Wnt-β-catenin
signaling pathway.
CONCLUSION: PACAP38 synergizes with irradiation to suppress the proliferation of
multiple cancer cells via regulating SOX6/Wnt/β-catenin signaling. This
combination may represent a promising therapeutic strategy for cancer treatment,
potentially improving outcomes for patients undergoing radiotherapy.
BACKGROUND: Natural killer cells (NK cells) are essential in cancer
immunosurveillance in the body as they can recognize cancer cells that lacking
MHC class 1 on their surface. Regulatory cytokines, including interleukin
(IL)-18, IL-12, IL-10, IL-8, interferon-γ (IFN-γ), and secretory granules like
perforin and granzyme are involved in NK cell-mediated cytotoxicity. Stimulating
NK cells cytotoxicity towards cancer cells is an ideal strategy to combat cancer
naturally. Medicinal plants have been reported to enhance immunity, with
Pereskia bleo (P. bleo) particularly noteworthy due to its abundant bioactive
compounds and ability to activate immune cells. This study aimed to evaluate the
potential of methanol extract of P. bleo leaves (MEPB) for enhancing NK cell
cytotoxicity against triple-negative human breast cancer cells (MDA-MB-231).
METHODS: The optimal concentration of MEPB to activate NK cells was determined
using healthy blood samples, assessing the expression of IL-12, IL-18, IL-10,
IL-8, IFN-γ, perforin, and granzyme B via an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA). NK cell purity from healthy donors and breast cancer patients was
determined using specific antibodies, and the number of NK cells was assessed
using flow cytometry and a hemocytometer. A co-culture experiment, ELISA, and
apoptosis assay were used to evaluate NK-mediated cytotoxicity pathways.
RESULTS: ELISA data indicated that MEPB at 7.5 µg/ml significantly increased the
expression of IFN-γ, IL-12, IL-18, perforin, and granzyme B while decreasing
IL-8 and IL-10 expression after 20 hrs of incubation. The average NK cell purity
was 87.09 ± 0.043%. Breast cancer patients exhibited lower NK cell counts than
healthy donors. Co-culture experiments demonstrated that NK cells induced
apoptosis in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells in the presence of MEPB by
increasing perforin, granzyme B, and IFN-γ expression in both healthy donors and
breast cancer patients-experimental groups. P. bleo enhances NK cell activation,
promoting the apoptosis of triple-negative human breast cancer cells
(MDA-MB-231), suggesting the potential use of MEPB leaves as an anti-cancer
immunostimulant.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer (BRCA), the hormone related malignant tumor, is
well-known for poor prognosis. ZNF208 mainly acts as a transcription factor in
various tumors, and the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of ZNF208 are
related to telomere length. Nevertheless, its role in breast tumorigenesis is
largely unknown.
METHODS: We systematically investigated the gene expression, prognostic value,
and promoter methylation of ZNF208 in BRCA with Gene Expression Profiling
Interactive Analysis (GEPIA) and DNA Methylation Interactive Visualization
Database (DNMIVD). Meanwhile, we clarified the association of ZNF208 with
tumor-infiltrating immune cells (TICs) from Tumor Immune Estimation Resource
(TIMER). Furthermore, we determined the biological process and functional
enrichment from Cancer single-cell state atlas (CancerSEA). Finally, we verified
our results with prognostic analysis and immunohistochemistry (IHC) assay.
RESULTS: We discovered that ZNF208 was downregulated in breast cancer, and low
expression of ZNF208 predicted worse prognosis of BRCA patients. The promoter
methylation level of ZNF208 was obviously increased, and ZNF208 was associated
with TlCs in BRCA. In addition, ZNF208 could inhibit the metastasis and invasion
biological processes, and regulate the MAPK and RAS signaling pathways in BRCA.
CONCLUSION: Our findings illustrate that ZNF208 can function as a tumor
suppressor and predict prognosis of breast cancer.
BACKGROUND: Globally, the disease that has the greatest impact on human health
and is the most difficult to overcome is cancer (tumor or malignant tumor is
another name for it). Cancers currently known to us can arise from almost any
organ or tissue in the human body. Its uncontrolled growth pattern and
metastasis characteristics are the fundamental reasons for the high mortality
rate of cancer and its current incurability. An increasing number of studies
have found that pyroptosis, a mode of programmed cell death, may inhibit tumor
growth by changing the tumor immune microenvironment (TIME).
METHODS: Through a retrospective study, we selected 160 cases of different tumor
tissues (including 40 cases each of esophageal cancer, gastric cancer, breast
cancer, and cervical cancer), and identified the expression of
caspase3/GasderminE in the tumor tissues through immunohistochemical staining
and infiltration of tumor-related immune cells. And analyze its relationship
with clinical parameters of tumor patients. In addition, we also marked caspase8
and caspase9 among the caspase family members to analyze the main factors
upstream of caspase3.
RESULTS: The results showed that the expression level of caspase3/GSDME in
different tumor tissues was positively correlated with the infiltration degree
of tumor-related immune cells (natural killer cells, CD8+T cells, macrophages,
etc). In addition, the expression level of caspase3 was positively correlated
with caspase8, but not caspase9.
SUMMARY: The expression levels of caspase3 and GSDME exhibited significant
impacts on the survival prognosis of patients with diverse tumors as well as
alterations in the immune microenvironment of tumor tissues, demonstrating
statistical significance. After Caspase3/GSDME triggers the pyroptosis pathway,
it may change the components of the immune microenvironment of tumor tissue,
thereby achieving the effect of inhibiting tumors.
BACKGROUND: In Egypt, there were 150,578 new cancer cases and 95,275 cancer
deaths in 2022, indicating a substantial burden on patients and the healthcare
system. The analysis aims to support decision-making related to investments in
cancer prevention and new treatments, by highlighting the economic burden
associated with five types of cancer.
METHODS: The human capital approach was used to estimate productivity losses
from premature mortality due to liver, lung, breast, bladder, and cervical
cancer in Egypt in 2019 by calculating years of life lost (YLL), years of
productive life lost (YPLL), and present value of future lost productivity
(PVFLP). Mortality data were sourced from the World Health Organization (WHO),
while life expectancy, retirement age, gross domestic product (GDP) per capita,
and labor force participation rates were obtained from the World Bank. Income
data, such as annual earnings and minimum wage were sourced from the Wage
Indicator database. Deterministic sensitivity analysis (DSA) assessed the
sensitivity of results to input variations.
RESULTS: In 2019, Egypt had a total of 45,114 deaths, from liver, lung, breast,
cervical, and bladder cancers, resulting in a productivity loss of $430,086,636.
Liver cancer led to the most male deaths (17,745) and breast cancer to the most
female deaths (6,754), with PVFLP of $232,663,468 and $130,745,592,
respectively. The five cancers resulted in 551,336 YLL and 235,415 YPLL in
Egypt. The total PVFLP was estimated at $217,224,178 for females and
$212,862,458 for males, with a total PVFLP/death of $9,533. The DSA showed that
the PVFLP was most sensitive to changes in the retirement age.
CONCLUSION: In conclusion, there is a substantial economic burden relating to
premature cancer mortality in Egypt, highlighting that policies and treatment
advances to decrease cancer are working, however, there is need for continuous
prioritization of awareness programs, cancer screening and treatment
advancements.
BACKGROUND: The National Comprehensive Cancer Network recommends qigong as an
aerobic exercise for reducing cancer-related fatigue in breast cancer survivors.
However, findings regarding the effects of qigong on cancer-related fatigue,
sleep disturbance, cognitive impairment, and quality of life in this population
remain inconclusive and contradictory. Further study is warranted to better
understand the impact of this exercise.
PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to assess the effects of qigong on
cancer-related fatigue, sleep disturbance, cognitive impairment, and quality of
life in breast cancer survivors using a systematic literature review and
meta-analysis.
METHODS: The search of the literature was conducted in accordance with PRISMA
2020. The databases searched included PubMed, EMBASE, Cochrane Library, CINAHL,
and Airiti Library, and relevant articles published between inception and March
2024 were retrieved systematically. The quality of the retrieved articles was
assessed using the Risk of Bias 2.0 tool, and statistical analyses were
performed using Comprehensive Meta-Analysis Version 2.0.
RESULTS: Eight randomized controlled trials with a total of 469 participants
were analyzed. Qigong was shown to significantly reduce cancer-related fatigue
(SMD = -0.86, 95% confidence interval, 95% CI [-1.24, -0.48], p < .001) and
sleep disturbance (SMD = -1.03, 95% CI [-1.36, -0.69], p < .001) and to improve
overall quality of life (SMD = 0.59, 95% CI [0.27, 0.92], p < .001).
CONCLUSIONS / IMPLICATIONS FOR PRACTICE: Qigong exercises that include specific
"moving meditation" and "dynamic posture" components and are performed for
session durations of 60 to 90 minutes with 3 to 5 sessions per week for a period
of 8 to 12 weeks may reduce cancer-related fatigue and sleep disturbance in
survivors of breast cancer. Furthermore, the overall effects of these
improvements were shown to enhance survivor quality of life.
BACKGROUND: Cancer Worry (CW) can shape the responses and behaviors of
information or support-seeking of daughters of women with breast cancer.
OBJECTIVE: This study aims to explore the roles of Cancer Worry (CW) as a
moderator and mediator in the relationship between information needs, support
needs, and psychological distress.
METHODS: A cross-sectional and correlational design was used in conjunction with
a convenience sampling strategy. Daughters of mothers with breast cancer were
requested to complete the questionnaires Impact of Event Scale Chinese version
(IES-C), Cancer Worry Scale for Genetic Counseling (CWS-GC), and Information and
Support Needs Questionnaire (ISNQ). Hayes' PROCESS macro using SPSS for Windows
were used to examine the mediator and moderator role of CW.
RESULTS: A total of 194 daughters provided data. Cancer worry was significantly
correlated with total IES (r = 0.352, P < .01), intrusion-IES (r = 0.353, P <
.01), avoidance-IES (r = 0.313, P < .01), unmet support needs (r = 0.226, P <
.01), and unmet information needs (r = 0.17, P < .05). Cancer worry mediated the
relationship between unmet support needs and total IES (β = 0.089, 95% CI:
0.026, 0.171) and moderated the relationship between unmet information needs and
total IES (β = -0.395, P = .018, 95% CI: -0.723, -0.066).
CONCLUSIONS: The role of cancer worry should be paid attention to when
clinicians deliver information and provide support as well as tailoring
psychological intervention for ameliorating distress in daughters of women with
breast cancer.
IMPLICATIONS FOR NURSING: Providing personalized information and support is
essential to address the unmet needs of daughters of women with breast cancer.
Healthcare professionals providing interventions to reduce distress and improve
overall care should consider individual CW.
PLAIN ENGLISH SUMMARY: This research looks at how worrying about cancer affects
daughters of women who have breast cancer. It focuses on the degree of cancer
worry changes the way they feel when they don't get the information and support.
Researchers used surveys to gather data from these daughters, examining how
their level of cancer worry influenced their needs for information and support
and their psychological distress. They found that greater unmet support needs
will intensify worry about cancer and then increase psychological stress.
However, too much or too little worry about cancer will also heighten their
psychological distress due to limited information. The findings suggest that
healthcare providers, including nurses, should consider the level of worry about
cancer when offering support and information to these individuals to help reduce
their stress.
BACKGROUND: For patients who achieve pathologic complete response (pCR) after
neoadjuvant chemotherapy with trastuzumab (T) and pertuzumab (P), the benefit of
adding P to T remains uncertain. We compared survival outcomes according to the
type of adjuvant anti-HER2 therapy in patients with pCR after chemotherapy with
BACKGROUND: For breast cancer patients receiving mastectomy with
direct-to-implant (DTI) immediate breast reconstruction, placing the implant in
the pre-pectoral or subpectoral plane remains debatable; especially in settings
of postmastectomy radiotherapy (PMRT).
MATERIALS/METHODS: We reviewed 3,039 patients who underwent mastectomy and
reconstruction at our institution between 2005 and 2020. Patients receiving DTI
with and without PMRT were included. PMRT was delivered either with photon
(3D-conformal or VMAT) or proton therapy mainly with pencil beam scanning. All
patients received conventional fractionation (50-50.4Gy in 25-28fractions).
Primary endpoints were reconstruction complications defined as
infection/necrosis requiring debridement; capsular-contracture requiring
capsulotomy; absolute-reconstruction-failure entailing permanent removal of the
implant without replacement (i.e: no salvage reconstruction) and
overall-reconstruction-failure (removal of implant for any complication with and
without salvage reconstruction). Different subgroups analyses were done.
RESULTS: 815 patients met inclusion criteria, with an overall median follow-up
of 6.2 years. We found that there is no significant difference between
pre-pectoral vs sub-pectoral for infection/necrosis (OR:1.5, p=0.3);
capsular-contracture (OR:0.97, p=0.9); absolute-reconstruction-failure (OR:1.9,
p=0.12) and overall-reconstruction-failure (OR:1.2, p=0.5). Findings were
confirmed using both logistic regression, time-to-event analysis and
multivariable analyses for the entire cohort and subgroups with and without
PMRT. There was no significant difference between Protons and Photons in terms
of infection/necrosis (OR:1.6, p=0.4) and absolute-reconstruction-failure (OR:
1.2, p=0.7), but significantly higher risks for capsular-contracture with
protons (OR:4.4, p<0.001) and overall-reconstruction-failure when compared to
photon(OR:2.0, p=0.05). We did not find significant correlation pattern between
different dosimetry factors (Dmean, Dmax, volume in cc) in either
reconstructed-chest-wall target or the skin structure, to reconstruction
complications; whether for protons or photons patients.
CONCLUSION: For patients receiving single-stage DTI reconstruction with and
without PMRT, pre-pectoral implant placement had similar rates of complications
and reconstruction failure compared to subpectoral reconstruction. Protons
compared to Photons did not increase the risk of infection/necrosis but
significantly increased capsular-contracture risks.
BACKGROUND: Sacituzumab Govitecan (SG), a first-in-class anti-trophoblast cell
surface antigen-2-directed antibody-drug conjugate (ADC), has shown clinically
meaningful improvement in outcomes of patients with breast cancer (BC). However,
it has also been accompanied by significant toxicity. Thus, we conducted a
systematic review and meta-analysis to evaluate the safety and tolerability of
SG in this patient population.
METHODS: We comprehensively searched PubMed, Embase, and Cochrane databases, and
ASCO and ESMO websites for clinical trials (CTs) assessing the safety of SG in
BC patients. All analyses were performed in R software (v.4.2.2) using random
effects models. Heterogeneity was assessed using I2 test.
RESULTS: Seven studies - three randomized clinical trials (RCTs) and four
single-arm phase I/II - were included, comprising 928 patients receiving SG and
576 on treatment of physician's choice (TPC). Most patients had triple negative
BC (54.4 %, n = 505), metastatic disease (89.8 %, n = 833), and were heavily
pretreated (at least two lines of prior therapy). Most common all-grade adverse
events (AEs) were: neutropenia (70 %, 95 % CI, 64-76 %), followed by nausea
(62 %, 95 % CI, 55-68 %), diarrhea (54 %, 95 % CI 47-60 %) and anemia (51 %,
95 % CI, 38-65 %). Regarding high-grade AEs, 46 % of patients developed grade ≥3
neutropenia. Compared to TPC, we observed a higher risk of neutropenia (OR 3.11,
95 % CI 1.62-5.99, I2 = 81 %; p < 0.001), diarrhea (OR 6.82, 95 % CI 3.99-11.66,
I2 = 64 %; p < 0.001) and anemia (OR 2.26, 95 % CI 1.20-4.27, I2 = 78 %;
p = 0.012) for those on SG. Dose reductions and treatment discontinuation were
reported in 22 % and 4 % of patients, respectively, and 19 deaths (2 %) were
documented. Most of them were not deemed to be treated-related.
CONCLUSION: This systematic review and meta-analysis provides extensive data on
the safety and management of SG toxicity in BC patients across clinical trials.
Concerning rates of neutropenia, nausea diarrhea, and anemia were reported. We
highlight the need for protocols establishing prophylactic measures and
strategies to mitigate SG-related toxicity.
BACKGROUND: Integration-a hallmark of mixed methods research (MMR)-is crucial
throughout the entire research process. Despite its importance, integration
remains an elusive concept often inadequately addressed by researchers, with
many publications focusing solely on the final stages of data analysis and
interpretation.
OBJECTIVES: The authors aim to synthesize methodologic discussions of the mixed
method research integration process and provide an illustration of integration
across all phases of an exemplar explanatory sequential study.
METHODS: Integration in MMR includes four distinct dimensions encompassing
philosophical assumptions and paradigms, methodological methods, and
dissemination of integrated study findings. This paper presents our integrated
study findings, illustrated by a research study conducted to investigate sleep
health among women with breast cancer.
RESULTS: Integration of quantitative and qualitative data analyses is
demonstrated through consistently matching the guiding paradigm with design
choice, meta-inferences, and visual joint displays. The connecting displays
linking quantitative and qualitative data, compare sleep characteristics scores,
and the relationship between anxiety and vasomotor symptoms. The results
highlight the significance of visual tools in enhancing the analytic processes
and providing a comprehensive understanding of complex clinical phenomena.
DISCUSSION: Integrating across all stages of mixed method research studies
presents many challenges. The proposed four-dimension model of integration
contributes to understanding the unique value of fully integrated mixed methods
results. The exemplary study findings confirm the value of integration in
achieving a nuanced and comprehensive understanding of a significant clinical
problem.
BACKGROUND: Resolvins, which are divided into series D (RvD) and E (RvE),
originate from omega-3 fatty acids, DHA and EPA and were recently found to be
involved in the modulation of inflammation in some tumors, including breast
cancer (BC). We aimed to assess the resolvin profiles (RvD1, RvD2, RvD3 and
RvE1) in the plasma of BC patients compared with those of controls and to
determine differences in their concentrations according to BC presentation and
immunohistochemical characteristics.
METHODS: We considered BC patients (sporadic, familiar and BRCA1/2-mutated
forms) naïve to any anticancer treatment and controls affected by nonmalignant
breast disease. According to the BC immunohistochemical characteristics, we
identified the luminal-A, luminal-B, HER2 + and triple-negative subtypes. The
levels of RvD1, RvD2, RvD3 and RvE1 in the plasma of all the participants were
measured via ELISA kits.
RESULTS: We enrolled 64 women, 53 with BC (age 51 ± 10 y) and 11 controls (age
49 ± 7 y). Twenty-seven patients presented with sporadic BC, 16 with a positive
history of BC (familiar), and 10 with BRCA 1/2 gene mutations. Compared with
control patients, BC patients presented higher levels of RvD1 (p = 0.015), and
no differences were detected for RvD2, 3 or RvE1. In BC, all resolvin levels
were positively correlated with each other (p < 0.001). The expression of RvD1
and RvD3 was lower in the mutated group than in the familiar and sporadic groups
(p < 0.05). The expression of RvD2 and RvE1 tended to be lower in the BRCA
1/2-mutated group than in the sporadic and familiar BC patients (p = 0.051 and
p = 0.062, respectively). No differences in plasma resolvin levels were observed
according to immunohistochemical characteristics (luminal A, luminal B, HER2+,
triple-negative). However, RvD1 was lower in triple-negative patients than in
patients with the other BC subtypes (p = 0.023). In terms of Ki-67 expression,
RvD3 expression was lower in patients with high Ki-67 expression ([Formula: see
text]20%) than in those with low Ki-67 expression (<20%) (p = 0.034).
CONCLUSION: This is the first human study profiling specific plasma resolvin
levels in BC patients, which revealed low plasma levels of some resolvins in
patients with BRCA1/2 mutations, triple-negative subtypes and high Ki-67
expression, potentially impacting treatment response and prognosis.
BACKGROUND: The presence of a DCIS component accompanying invasive breast cancer
(IBC) is associated with a higher rate of primary mastectomy compared to IBC
without DCIS. After neoadjuvant systemic therapy (NST), HER2+ IBC patients show
high response rates, allowing for increasing breast-conserving surgery rates.
The aim of this study was to examine surgical trends after NST in a Dutch
nationwide HER2+ cohort, and the influence of a DCIS component on mastectomy
rate.
METHODS: Women with HER2+ IBC, diagnosed between 2010 and 2019 and treated with
NST and surgery were included from the Netherlands Cancer Registry. Mastectomy
rate was examined over the years, and compared between patients with and without
a DCIS component in the pre-NST biopsy. Multivariable logistic regression
analysis was used to investigate the association of the DCIS component with
mastectomy rate and likelihood of achieving ypT0.
RESULTS: In total, 5289 patients were included. Over 10 years, mastectomy rate
significantly decreased from 62.6 % in 2010 to 35.1 % in 2019. Patients with
IBC+DCIS more often underwent mastectomy, with a rate of 48.4 % in 2019,
compared to 30.0 % in IBC only (p < 0.001). Percentage of ypT0 was significantly
lower in patients with IBC+DCIS (38.7 %), compared to IBC only (47.3 %,
p < 0.001) Multivariable logistic regression analyses showed presence of DCIS
(OR 1.69, 95%CI 1.47-1.95, p < 0.001) to be independently associated with
mastectomy.
CONCLUSION: Rate of mastectomy decreased significantly in HER2+ IBC treated with
NST between 2010 and 2019. Presence of DCIS in the biopsy remained associated
with higher mastectomy rate, yet 38.7 % of these patients do achieve ypT0.
BACKGROUND: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is characterized by its rapid
progression and aggressive nature, with limited effective therapeutic
interventions currently available. Cyclovirobuxine D (CVB-D), a natural alkaloid
extracted from the traditional Chinese herb Buxus sinica, is renowned for its
cardioprotective and anti-ischemic effects, demonstrating notable anti-cancer
properties. Nevertheless, the anti-tumor effects of CVB-D on TNBC remain
unverified.
PURPOSE: This study seeks to investigate the effects of CVB-D on TNBC and to
uncover the underlying mechanisms.
STUDY DESIGN: Network pharmacology, SPR, DSF, and cell-based functional assays
were conducted on TNBC cells to assess the impact of CVB-D. Findings were
further corroborated using xenograft mouse models.
METHODS: Cell Counting Kit-8, 5-Ethynyl-2'-deoxyuridine, transwell assays, flow
cytometry, wound healing assays, immunofluorescence, and immunoblotting were
employed to evaluate CVB-D's influence on TNBC cell lines. SPR, DSF and
molecular docking techniques were utilized to assess the binding affinity of
CVB-D to Yes-associated protein (YAP). The interaction between CVB-D and
autophagy/mitophagy was further analyzed through plasmid transient transfection,
JC-1 assay, TUNEL assay, and the use of autophagy inhibitors. The anti-TNBC
mechanism of CVB-D was elucidated by overexpressing YAP in MDA-MB-231 cells.
Additionally, the in vivo efficacy and safety of CVB-D were assessed in a
xenograft mouse model.
RESULTS: In vitro analyses revealed that CVB-D effectively suppressed G1 phase
arrest and inhibited TNBC cell proliferation. Moreover, CVB-D induced
mitochondrial-dependent apoptosis and reduced cell migration by antagonizing
epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Mechanistically, CVB-D exerted its
anti-cancer effects by directly binding to YAP, thereby inhibiting the nuclear
translocation of YAP/TAZ and suppressing the transcription of downstream
oncogenic target genes. Furthermore, CVB-D triggered excessive mitophagy by
activating the FOXO3a/PINK1-Parkin axis, promoting apoptosis and leading to
mitochondrial dysfunction in TNBC cells. Elevated YAP expression counteracted
the effects of CVB-D on TNBC, including the suppression of mitophagy-related
protein expression induced by CVB-D, suggesting that YAP modulates mitophagy
through the FOXO3a/PINK1-Parkin axis. The anti-tumor efficacy of CVB-D and its
underlying mechanisms were further substantiated using a subcutaneous xenograft
model.
CONCLUSIONS: This study is the first to demonstrate that CVB-D can directly bind
to the YAP target, proposing a novel therapeutic strategy for TNBC. CVB-D may
serve both as a YAP/TAZ inhibitor and as an activator of the FOXO3a/PINK1-Parkin
axis, leading to excessive mitophagy.
BACKGROUND: 20% of prostate cancer (PC) patients harbor germinal or somatic
alterations in homologous recombination repair (HRR) genes, including BRCA1/2.
BRCA mutations represent predictive biomarkers for treatment with polyadenosine
diphosphate-ribose inhibitors (PARPi). Olaparib has shown efficacy in metastatic
castration-resistant PC (mCRPC) and is currently approved in Italy for mCRPC
with BRCA1/2 mutations. National and international guidelines strongly recommend
BRCA testing in PC. However, genetic testing presents challenges in clinical
practice that may limit access to PARPi.
METHODS: we conducted a survey directed towards members of the Italian
Association of Medical Oncology to highlight the level of implementation of
national recommendations and issues associated with genetic testing. Through an
anonymous questionnaire, the survey collected clinical data of PC patients
undergoing BRCA testing and the main difficulties to face in conducting the
analysis.
RESULTS: The survey was completed by 108 participants (5% of AIOM members).
52.8% of respondents test BRCA in all metastatic PC patients. If tissue analysis
is invalid, only 17% use liquid biopsy, and 15.7% always consider a re-biopsy of
a metastatic lesion. A quarter of respondents have to outsource genetic testing
to another center and 17.6% have a split process between different institutions.
Long timelines, lack of a predefined procedure, and unavailability of liquid
biopsy represent the main issues based on respondents' opinions.
CONCLUSIONS: BRCA testing in PC still presents several difficulties in clinical
practice that can limit access to PARPi treatment. Better implementation of
molecular testing to identify BRCA-mutated patients is crucial for tailored
treatment in mCRPC.
BACKGROUND: S-1 monotherapy had previously been widely used as a second-line
treatment for pancreatic cancer (PC) after gemcitabine-based chemotherapy mainly
in Japan. Based on the results of the NAPOLI-1 trial, the recommended
second-line therapy is now liposomal irinotecan plus fluorouracil/folinic acid
(nal-IRI + 5-FU/LV). However, there have been no studies comparing
nal-IRI + 5-FU/LV therapy with S-1 monotherapy.
METHODS: The main objective of this study was to compare overall survival (OS)
in patients treated with nal-IRI + 5-FU/LV and those treated with S-1
monotherapy as second-line treatments, using the inverse probability of
treatment weighting (IPTW) method. This study was conducted in 31 institutions
participating in Japan Oncology Network in Hepatobiliary and Pancreas. To
minimize potential biases due to the retrospective design, IPTW analysis was
performed with multiple imputation, and imputed IPTW-adjusted hazard ratios and
corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were estimated using a Cox
proportional hazards model and combined into pooled estimates.
RESULTS: A total of 463 metastatic PC patients were enrolled in this study (257
in the S-1 monotherapy group and 206 in the nal-IRI + 5-FU/LV group). The median
OS was 7.50 months (95% CI 4.18-12.69 months) in the nal-IRI + 5-FU/LV group and
5.72 months (95% CI 2.76-10.79 months) in the S-1 monotherapy group. In the
IPTW-adjusted Cox proportional hazards model, nal-IRI + 5-FU/LV was associated
with a significant OS benefit (pooled IPTW-adjusted hazard ratio, 0.779; 95% CI
0.399-0.941; p = 0.025).
CONCLUSION: These findings support the use of nal-IRI + 5-FU/LV as standard
second-line treatment for PC patients after gemcitabine-based chemotherapy.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is the most common malignancy and the leading cause of
cancer death among women. NDC80 kinetochore complex component (NUF2) is
demonstrated to implicate the progression of human cancer. But the role of NUF2
in breast cancer progression is unclear. Here, we aimed to study the role and
regulatory mechanisms of NUF2 in breast cancer metastasis.
METHODS: Immunohistochemistry was used to determine UNF2 expression in clinical
samples. Transwell assas were used to determine the role of NUF2 in breast
cancer migration and invasion. Animal model in vivo was used to determine the
rold of NUF2 in breast cancer metastasis.
RESULTS: NUF2 was upregulated significantly in breast cancer tissues and cells.
Worse prognosis was noted in patients with high NUF2 levels compared with that
in patients with low NUF2 levels. NUF2 overexpression markedly enhanced, while
NUF2 knockdown inhibited, breast cancer cell invasion and migration.
Mechanistically, NUF2 was observed to upregulate Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway
activity. The promoting effect of NUF2 on cell migration and invasion were
blocked by inhibition of the Wnt/β-catenin pathway.
CONCLUSIONS: We revealed that NUF2 promotes breast cancer progression via
activating Wnt/β-catenin signaling, suggesting that NUF2 might be a new
potential target for breast cancer treatment.
BACKGROUND: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is currently the most
aggressive subtype of breast cancer, characterized by high heterogeneity and
strong invasiveness, and currently lacks effective therapies. PRMT5, a type II
protein arginine methyltransferase, is upregulated in numerous cancers,
including TNBC, and plays a critical role, marked it as an attractive
therapeutic target. PROTAC (Proteolysis Targeting Chimeras) is an innovative
drug development technology that utilizes the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS)
to degrade target proteins, which is characterized by higher activity, enhanced
safety, lower resistance, and reduced toxicity, offering significant value for
clinical translation.
METHODS: This study utilizes the PROTAC technology to develop potential
degraders targeting PRMT5 in vitro and in vivo.
RESULTS: Through the design, synthesis and screening of a series of targeted
compounds, we identified YZ-836P as an effective compound that exerted cytotoxic
effects and reduced the protein levels of PRMT5 and its key downstream target
protein KLF5 in TNBC after 48 h. Its efficacy was significantly superior to the
PRMT5 PROTAC degraders that had been reported. YZ-836P induced G1 phase cell
cycle arrest and significantly induced apoptosis in TNBC cells. Additionally, we
demonstrated that YZ-836P promoted the ubiquitination and degradation of PRMT5
in a cereblon (CRBN)-dependent manner. Notably, YZ-836P exhibited pronounced
efficacy in inhibiting the growth of TNBC patient-derived organoids and
xenografts in nude mice.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings position YZ-836P as a promising candidate for
advancing treatment modalities for TNBC.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Ethics Committee of Yunnan Cancer Hospital, KYCS2023-078.
Registered 7 June 2023.
BACKGROUND: Cancer is the second most common cause of death globally. Therefore,
it is imperative to investigate cancer incidence, mortality rates, and
disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) to enhance preventive measures and
healthcare resource allocation. This study aimed to assess cancer burden and
associated risk factors in 204 countries and territories between 1980 and 2021.
METHODS: We selected data on cancer incidence and mortality rates and associated
risk factors from the global burden of disease (GBD) study tool for 204
countries and territories from 1990 to 2021 and 1980 to 2021. We estimated the
age-standardized incidence (ASIR) and age-standardized deaths (ASDR) of 34
cancer types categorized as level 3 causes based on the GBD hierarchy.
RESULTS: In 2021, cancer accounted for 14.57% (95% uncertainty interval:
13.65-15.28) of total deaths and 8.8% (7.99-9.67) of total DALYs in both sexes
globally. ASIR and ASDR were 790.33 (694.43-893.01) and 116.49 (107.28-124.69),
respectively. Additionally, females exhibited higher ASIR than males (923.44
versus 673.09), while males exhibited higher ASDR than females (145.69 versus
93.60). This indicates that policymakers should focus on the importance of
gender equality in healthcare. Non-melanoma skin cancer exhibited the highest
ASIR (74.10) in both sexes, while digestive cancers accounted for 39.29% of all
cancer-related deaths, and Asia exhibited the heaviest cancer burden. In
females, breast cancer exhibited the highest ASIR (46.40) and ASDR (14.55). In
males, tracheal, bronchial, and lung cancer exhibited the highest ASIR (37.85)
and ASDR (34.32), highlighting the urgent need for targeted tobacco control
measures. Different cancers in various countries exhibit unique characteristics.
Therefore, policymakers should formulate specific prevention and control
strategies that reflect the cancer in their country. Tobacco was the primary
level 2 risk factor for cancer DALYs in males. It accounted for 29.32%
(25.32-33.14) of all cancer DALYs. Dietary risks, alcohol consumption, and air
pollution accounted for 5.89% (2.01-10.73), 5.48% (4.83-6.11), and 4.30%
(2.77-5.95) of male cancer DALYs, respectively. Therefore, policymakers should
prioritize smoking regulation and other carcinogenic risks.
CONCLUSION: Cancer is a significant public health concern globally.
Understanding the common etiologies of different cancers is essential for
developing effective control strategies and targeted interventions.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is one of the most common cancers in women and is
closely associated with obesity. Gremlin-2 (GREM2), an antagonist for bone
morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), has been considered an inhibitor of adipogenic
differentiation in adipose-derived stromal/stem cells. However, the role of
GREM2 in breast cancer cells remains largely unknown, and its signaling
mechanism has yet to be clarified.
METHODS: Bioinformatics analysis was conducted using public databases. Breast
cancer cells overexpressing mock or GREM2 were used for in vitro and in vivo
studies. Cell viability, colony formation, migration, and animal studies were
performed to investigate the role of GREM2 in breast cancer cells. Screening of
target genes affected by GREM2 overexpression in breast cancer cells was
performed through RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) analysis.
RESULTS: The expression level of GREM2 mRNA was significantly reduced in both
breast cancer tissues and cell lines. Kaplan-Meier analysis showed that low
expression of GREM2 and high methylation of the GREM2 promoter were each
associated with poor patient survival. The low mRNA expression of GREM2 in
breast cancer cells was increased by the demethylating agent decitabine. Breast
cancer cells overexpressing GREM2 decreased cell proliferation when compared to
control cells, both in vitro and in vivo. Through comparison of RNA-seq analysis
between cell lines and tissue samples, gene ontologies that were consistently
upregulated or downregulated by GREM2 in breast cancer were identified. In
particular, the expression of inhibitor of DNA-binding-1 (ID1) was repressed by
GREM2. BMP2 is one of the upstream regulators that increases the expression of
ID1, and the expression of ID1 reduced by GREM2 was restored by overexpression
of BMP2. Also, the migration ability of breast cancer cells, which had been
suppressed by GREM2, was restored by BMP2 or ID1.
CONCLUSIONS: Low expression of GREM2 in breast cancer cells is associated with
hypermethylation of the GREM2 promoter, which may ultimately contribute to poor
patient survival. GREM2 participates in regulating the expression of various
genes, including ID1, and is involved in suppressing the proliferation of breast
cancer cells. This suggests that GREM2 has the potential to act as a novel tumor
suppressor in breast cancer.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer, which is the most prevalent form of cancer among
women globally, encompasses various subtypes that demand distinct treatment
approaches. The tumor microenvironment and immune response are of crucial
significance in the development and progression of breast cancer. Nevertheless,
there has been scant evidence concerning the genes within breast cancer -
specific immune cells.
METHODS: We utilized summary data-based Mendelian randomization (SMR) to
identify genes associated with breast cancer by utilizing expression
quantitative trait loci (eQTL) datasets for 14 different immune cell types and
genome-wide association studies (GWAS) for overall breast cancer and its
subtypes. Furthermore, colocalization analysis was carried out to evaluate
whether the observed association in SMR analyses is influenced by the same
causal variant. Replication analysis and bulk RNA sequencing (bulkRNA-seq)
analysis were employed to validate promising immune genes as potential drug
targets.
RESULTS: After correcting for the rate of false discovery, we discovered a total
of 17 genes in 9 immune cell types that were significantly associated with
overall breast cancer and its subtypes. The genes KCNN4, L3MBTL3, ZBTB38, MDM4,
and TNFSF10 were identified in overall breast cancer and its subtypes.
Colocalization analyses provided robust evidence in support of these
associations. Notably, the KCNN4 gene in non-classical MONOcytes (MONOnc) was
further validated through replication analysis and bulkRNA-seq analysis.
CONCLUSION: In summary, our research has revealed a repertoire of genes within
diverse immune cells associated with breast cancer. KCNN4 gene in non-classical
MONOcytes (MONOnc) exhibited a negative association with overall breast cancer
and its subtypes, which was identified as a potential drug target for breast
cancer, opening up new avenues for therapeutic interventions.
BACKGROUND: Solitary pulmonary nodules (SPNs) remain difficult to diagnose for
clinical therapeutic purposes in patients with a history of breast cancer. This
study try to investigate the value of 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) positron
emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) combined with
clinicopathological predictors for the differential diagnosis of SPNs in breast
cancer patients.
METHODS: One hundred and twenty breast cancer patients with newly detected SPNs
were enrolled in the study and divided into a primary lung cancer (PLC) group
and a breast cancer metastasis (BCM) group. The clinicopathological
characteristics as well as metabolic and morphological characteristics on
18F-FDG-PET/CT images of 120 patients were retrospectively reviewed. The
differences of clinicopathological and 18F-FDG-PET/CT characteristics between
the two groups were analyzed, and multivariate analyses for the diagnosis of
SPNs were performed.
RESULTS: Clinicopathological terms of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and CA15-3
levels exhibited significant differences between PLC and BCM groups (P = 0.005
and P = 0.001, respectively). Metabolic characteristics of 18F-FDG-PET/CT images
included FDG uptake, SUVmax of SPNs, hilar and/or mediastinal lymph node
metastasis, SUVmax of hilar and/or mediastinal lymph node, and extrapulmonary
metastasis showed significant differences between PLC and BCM groups (P = 0.004,
P < 0.001, P = 0.01, P = 0.032 and P = 0.023, respectively). The lobulation
sign, spicule sign, and pleural indentation sign were identified as
statistically different morphological features of PLC in CT images (all
P < 0.001). Among these, the SUVmax of SPNs, lobulation sign, and pleural
indentation sign were valuable predictive factors for accurate diagnosis of SPNs
in breast cancer patients.
CONCLUSIONS: 18F-FDG-PET/CT combined with serum tumor markers are valuable for
the diagnosis of SPNs in breast cancer patients.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer (BC) is caused by the uncontrolled proliferation of
breast epithelial cells followed by malignant transformation, and it has the
highest incidence among female malignant tumors. The metastasis of BC occurs
through direct and lymphatic spread. Although ocular metastasis is relatively
rare, it is a good indicator of a worse prognosis. We used machine learning (ML)
to establish a model to analyze the risk factors of BC eye metastasis.
METHODS: The clinical data of 2225 patients with BC from 2003 to 2019 were
collected and randomly classified into the training and test sets using a ratio
of 7:3. Based on the presence or absence of eye metastasis, the patients with BC
were classified into the ocular metastasis (OM) and non-ocular metastasis (NOM)
groups. Univariate and multivariate logistic regression analyses and least
absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) were conducted. We used six ML
algorithms to establish a predictive BC model and used 10-fold cross-validation
for internal verification. The area under the receiver operating characteristic
(ROC) curve was used to evaluate the predictive ability of the model. In
addition, we established a web hazard calculator depending on the
best-performing model to facilitate its clinical application. Shapley additive
interpretation (SHAP) was used to determine the risk factors and the
interpretability of the black box model.
RESULTS: Univariate logistic regression analysis showed that histopathology
(other types), axillary lymph node metastasis (ALNM) (> 4), Ca2+, total
cholesterol (TC), low-density lipoprotein (LDL), apolipoprotein A (ApoA),
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), carbohydrate antigen (CA) 125, CA153, CA199,
alkaline phosphatase (ALP), and hemoglobin (Hb) were risk factors for BC eye
metastasis. Multivariate logistic regression analysis showed that CA153, ApoA,
and LDL were hazardous components for BC eye metastasis. LASSO showed that ALNM,
LDL, CA125, Hb, ALP, and CA199 were the first six key variables that were useful
for the diagnosis of ocular metastasis in breast cancer. Bootstrapped
aggregation (BAG) demonstrated the discriminative ability (area under ROC curve
[AUC] = 0.992, accuracy = 0.953, sensitivity = 0.987). Based on this, we applied
the BAG machine learning model to build an online web computing system to help
clinicians assist in determining the risk of BC eye metastasis. In addition, two
typical cases are analyzed to determine the interpretability of the model.
CONCLUSION: We used ML to establish a risk prediction model for BC ocular
metastasis, and BAG showed the greatest performance. The model can predict the
risk of OM in patients with BC, facilitate early and timely diagnosis and
treatment, and reduce the burden on society.
BACKGROUND: The disease impact of breast cancer is to view the couple as a
whole, breast cancer is a disease shared by the couple. Cancer coping has
evolved from an individual perspective to a dyadic coping perspective for
couples. The purpose of this study was to identify and describe the dyadic
coping categories of couples with breast cancer and to analyze the relationship
between dyadic coping categories and post-traumatic growth (PTG) in couples with
breast cancer.
METHOD: In this study, breast cancer patients and their spouses were selected as
the study population from several tertiary hospitals in Jinzhou City using
convenience sampling method in 2023. A general information questionnaire, Dyadic
Coping Inventory (DCI), and Post-traumatic Growth Inventory (PTGI) were used to
survey 254 couples with breast cancer. Latent profile analysis (LPA) was
performed using Mplus (version 8.3). SPSS 26.0 was used for data entry, and data
were analyzed using one-way analysis of variance and multifactor logistic
regression. Significance level α = 0.05.
RESULT: The study examines the influence of various factors such as educational
attainment, age, income, residence, medical insurance, surgical procedure type,
disease stage, and breast cancer recurrence on patients' coping strategies.
Multiple logistic regression analysis showed that education level, age at
marriage, place of residence, form of health care coverage, stage of the
disease, and whether or not the disease recurred were significant predictors of
each indicator (P < 0.05). The LPA yielded four dyadic coping subgroups, with
high relative entropy (0.942), respectively, each accounting for 7.4%, 17.1%,
24.3%, and 51.2% of the total. The study found that the high-level coping group
scored significantly higher in all dimensions of binary coping with
post-traumatic growth among different patient and spouse subgroups.
CONCLUSION: Couple dyadic coping in breast cancer patients was categorized into
four groups. The low-level coping group is the one that needs focused
observation and intervention. This is a better reference for caregivers to
provide more targeted coping programs based on the different dyadic coping
categories of couples of breast cancer patients.
BACKGROUND: Axillary lymph node status is valuable in determining systemic and
radiation therapy. Following neoadjuvant therapy for patients with clinically
involved axillary nodes, the role of axillary lymph node dissection (ALND)
following a positive sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB) is a subject of
controversy.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed 224 neoadjuvant
chemotherapy-treated node-positive breast cancer cases and evaluated the role of
ALND in optimizing staging accuracy and treatment outcomes.
RESULTS: About 63 (27.8%) underwent ALND based on post neoadjuvant persistent
positive lymph nodes on exam /imaging. SLNBs were performed in 161 (71.9%)
patients as initial surgical planning; 67 (41.6%) patients had positive SLNB
results, and 51 (76.1%) underwent further ALND. In patients with 1 positive
sentinel lymph node, follow-up ALND yielded additional positive lymph nodes in
10.5% of cases, whereas in patients with 2 or more positive sentinel lymph
nodes, follow-up ALND yielded additional positive lymph nodes in 87.5% of cases.
The presence of 2 positive macro-metastatic sentinel lymph nodes significantly
predicts additional nodal involvement, especially in patients without a
pathologic complete response.
CONCLUSION: De-escalation of axillary surgery to SLNB alone in this context may
be safely considered in neoadjuvant-treated clinical node positive patient with
<2 positive sentinel lymph nodes. Our findings help guide surgeons to
appropriately select patients who can potentially benefit from ALND for
locoregional control and recommendation for adjuvant radiation.
BACKGROUND: Estrogen receptor (ER) status in breast cancer (BC) is routinely
determined by immunohistochemistry (IHC); however, this technique is not without
limitations, including false results. Imaging of CeriannaTM (fluoroestradiol
F18) injection provides high diagnostic accuracy of ER expression, supplementing
information from biopsy. A Clinical Decision Support (CDS) tool was developed to
better assess its clinical usefulness in metastatic and recurrent breast cancer
management. This study evaluated a conceptual tool that reflects clinical
practice variables.
METHODS: Individual patient characteristics - candidacy for therapeutic
treatment and rate of recurrence - determined initial eligibility. The CDS tool
uses rules (IF-THEN statements) to produce an output on the diagnostic accuracy
of ER status based on tumor burden, anatomical location(s) of metastasis,
heterogeneity, and confidence in sample collection & pathology accuracy (CSC &
PA). An Excel-based probability decision tree calculates the accuracy of ER
expression.
RESULTS: 360 oncologists in the United States participated in the survey study.
223 respondents identified as medical oncologists (62%), 77 as clinical
oncologists (21%), and 60 as hematologic oncologists (17%). 93% of respondents
found the CDS tool intuitive and easy to follow with medical and clinical
oncologists favoring the tool more than hematologic oncologists. Individual CDS
attributes - clinical criteria, diagnostic comparator, true positive and true
negative, patient inclusion and exclusion, and clinical patient level inputs -
were tested with overall positive feedback.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on respondent feedback, further development of CDS tools are
warranted for potential use in patients' diagnostic workup.
BACKGROUND: A previous phase 2 trial showed promising outcomes for patients with
HER2-positive early-stage breast cancer using neoadjuvant de-escalation
chemotherapy with paclitaxel, trastuzumab, and pertuzumab. We aimed to evaluate
the efficacy of weekly nab-paclitaxel compared with the standard regimen of
docetaxel plus carboplatin, both with trastuzumab and pertuzumab, as neoadjuvant
therapies for patients with HER2-positive breast cancer.
METHODS: HELEN-006 was a multicentre, randomised, phase 3 trial done at six
hospitals in China. We enrolled patients aged 18-70 years with untreated,
histologically confirmed stage II-III invasive HER2-positive breast cancer and
an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status of 0 or 1. Using an
interactive response system, patients were randomly assigned (1:1) under a
permuted block randomisation scheme (block size of four), stratified by tumour
stage, nodal status, and hormone receptor status. Patients received either
intravenous nab-paclitaxel (125 mg/m2 on days 1, 8, and 15) for six 3-week
cycles, or intravenous docetaxel (75 mg/m2 on day 1) plus intravenous
carboplatin (area under the concentration-time curve 6 mg/mL per min on day 1)
for six 3-week cycles. Both groups also received concurrent intravenous
trastuzumab, with an initial loading dose of 8 mg/kg and a maintenance dose of 6
mg/kg on day 1, as well as intravenous pertuzumab with a loading dose of 840 mg
and a maintenance dose of 420 mg on day 1. This report is the final analysis of
the primary endpoint, pathological complete response (ypT0/is ypN0), analysed in
all patients who started treatment (modified intention to treat). The trial is
registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT04547907, and follow-up of the adjuvant
phase is ongoing.
FINDINGS: Between Sept 20, 2020, and March 1, 2023, 789 patients were screened
for eligibility, 689 of whom were randomly assigned (343 to the nab-paclitaxel
group and 346 to the docetaxel plus carboplatin group). All 689 patients were
Asian women. 669 patients received at least one dose of the study treatment and
were included in the full analysis set (332 in the nab-paclitaxel group and 337
in the docetaxel plus carboplatin group). Median age of the patients was 50
years (IQR 43-55). Median follow-up time was 26 months (IQR 19-32). 220 (66·3%
[95% CI 61·2-71·4]) patients in the nab-paclitaxel group had a pathological
complete response, compared with 194 (57·6% [52·3-62·9]) in the docetaxel plus
carboplatin group (combined odds ratio 1·54 [95% CI 1·10-2·14]; stratified
p=0·011). 100 (30%) patients in the nab-paclitaxel group and 128 (38%) in the
docetaxel plus carboplatin group had grade 3-4 adverse events. The most common
grade 3-4 adverse events were nausea (22 [7%] in the nab-paclitaxel group vs 76
[23%] in the docetaxel plus carboplatin group), diarrhoea (25 [8%] vs 55 [16%]),
and neuropathy (43 [13%] vs eight [2%]). Serious drug-related adverse events
were reported in three (1%) patients in the nab-paclitaxel group and five (2%)
in the docetaxel plus carboplatin group. No treatment-related deaths were
reported in either group.
INTERPRETATION: These findings might suggest a potential advantage of
nab-paclitaxel combined with trastuzumab and pertuzumab compared with the
standard regimen in neoadjuvant therapy for patients with HER2-positive early
breast cancer, suggesting that this new combination might establish a new
standard for neoadjuvant treatment in this patient population.
FUNDING: National Natural Science Foundation of China, and Science and
Technology Research Projects of Henan Province, China.
TRANSLATION: For the Chinese translation of the abstract see Supplementary
Materials section.
BACKGROUND: Patients with HER2-positive breast cancer have a significant risk of
developing brain metastases (BrM), which have detrimental effects on survival
outcomes and quality of life. Although there are several systemic treatment
options available that may delay the appearance of BrM and secondary progression
of previously treated BrM, there are still substantial unmet needs for this
patient population and primary prevention remains elusive.
METHODS: A group of experts created consensus statements, through a modified
Delphi process, to bridge the gap between current unmet needs, available
evidence, and international guidelines.
RESULTS: The steering committee reviewed all relevant literature and formed
research questions to be answered by the subsequent consensus statements. In
total, 61 contributors provided feedback on the consensus statements, with 34
statements reaching agreement out of the 55 statements that were voted on
altogether. Statements with consensus aimed to define BrM primary and secondary
prevention, screening procedures, assessment of symptoms, treatment efficacy,
and preventing the occurrence and progression of BrM, while acknowledging the
possibilities and limitations in daily clinical practice. Some statements did
not reach agreement for a variety of reasons, mostly due to lack of evidence.
CONCLUSIONS: The consensus statements outlined in this publication provide a
point of reference for daily clinical practice and can act as recommendations
for clinical trial procedures and future guidelines.
BACKGROUND: Patients with hormone receptor-positive, human epidermal growth
factor receptor 2 (HER2)-negative breast cancer (HR+ BC) with unfavorable
features have an increased risk of relapse and are currently candidate for
additional treatment strategies. We evaluated the real-world clinicopathological
characteristics, treatment patterns and survival outcomes of these patients
within the CANcer TOxicities study (CANTO, NCT01993498).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This is a retrospective analysis of the prospective data
collected within CANTO between 2012 and 2022. Patients with high-risk HR+ BC
were defined either by the identification of at least four positive axillary
lymph nodes (LNs) or one to three positive axillary LNs with a tumor size ≥5 cm
or histologic grade 3 (cohort 1). The definition 1-3 positive LNs with Ki-67
≥20% was also considered (cohort 2). The Kaplan-Meier method was used for
survival analysis.
RESULTS: Patients with high-risk HR+ BC represented 15.0%-19.6% of HR+ BC
(cohort 1 and 2, respectively) in the CANTO cohort. Of the 1266 patients in
cohort 1, 617 patients (49.0%) had ≥4 LNs, 327 (26.0%) had tumor ≥5 cm and 727
(57.6%) had grade III tumors. 79.9% had a favorable Charlson comorbidity score
and 88.1% stage II/IIIA. Patients with ≥10 LNs accounted for 11.8%.
(Neo)adjuvant chemotherapy was administered in 94.2%. Endocrine therapy was
prescribed in 97.3%, mostly with aromatase inhibitors and discontinued in 34.3%,
mainly for adverse events. Patients enrolled at least 6 years before data
extraction had a 5-year invasive disease-free survival and 5-year distant
relapse-free survival of 79.9% [95% confidence interval (CI) 77.2% to 82.4%] and
83.5% (95% CI 80.9% to 85.7%), respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: This real-world study confirms that patients with HR+ BC and
unfavorable clinicopathological features are at risk of relapse early in their
adjuvant treatment trajectory, despite (neo)adjuvant chemotherapy. It is
imperative to implement innovative treatment approaches for high-risk patients,
ideally adding them as early as possible to the adjuvant treatment.
BACKGROUND: Different molecular subtypes, including HER2-positive, have been
identified in breast cancer. The overexpression of HER2 triggers downstream
signaling pathways such as the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway. Until recently,
trastuzumab has been used as a single HER2-targeted therapy in Egypt. However,
resistance to trastuzumab has been reported. Previous studies have demonstrated
the genetic variants that affect the trastuzumab response. However in Egypt, few
studies investigated molecular biomarkers such as p53 that might affect the
trastuzumab response. Therefore, we aimed to extend the genetics workup of Her2
+ BC to include important oncogenes and other vital cancer pathways.
METHODS: Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded samples were collected from 24 HER2+
BC Egyptian patients, twelve patients in complete remission for 2 years or more
from the start of trastuzumab and twelve resistant patients who relapsed or
developed metastasis within 2 years from the start of trastuzumab. Somatic
mutations in hotspot regions of 17 genes were further investigated using
next-generation sequencing.
RESULTS: Among the total number of identified variants (106 variants), PIK3CA
showed the most frequent variants, with more variants occurring in the resistant
group than in the responsive group (P= 0.004). The frequency of PIK3CA mutations
was greater in resistant patients than in responsive patients (P= 0.036).
Additionally, there was a significant correlation between PIK3CA mutations and
pathological complete response (pCR) (P=0.036). Most of PIK3CA variants in
resistant patients were detected in exon 9 and 20. The PIK3CA variants
His1047Tyr, Glu545Lys, His701Pro, Lys111Glu, Val344Gly and Tyr1021Cys were found
only in the resistant patients, suggesting that they are associated with
trastuzumab resistance.
CONCLUSION: PIK3CA variants were more frequent in resistant HER2+ BC patients
than in responsive patients, with a significant correlation between PIK3CA
mutation and a lower pCR rate. PIK3CA variants within exon 9 and 20 (such as
Glu545Lys and His1047Tyr respectively) were associated with trastuzumab
resistance.
BACKGROUND: The antioxidant and antiproliferative activities of various parts of
the Punica granatum L. fruit (Nimali variety) on MCF-7 human breast cancer cells
have been investigated.  The analysis of the effect on gene regulation and
apoptosis induction compared to different extraction methods, was carried out
highlighting the fruit's potential anticancer properties attributed to
polyphenol-rich composition.
METHODS: This study analyzed alterations in radical scavenging capacity (RSC),
phenol (TPC), and flavonoid contents (FC) of pomegranate fruit parts, and
antiproliferative activity towards MCF-7 cancer cells using different extraction
methods. Most effective peel extract/s were analyzed for total protein content,
nitric oxide production, LDH, and Caspase 3 and 8 activities. RT-qPCR was
performed with intact RNA to examine the apoptotic pathway and gene expression,
and western blot analysis confirmed the presence of tumor suppressor protein/s.
RESULTS: The sonicated peel extract (SPL) exhibited the highest RSC, TPC, and
FC. Fermented juice displayed higher RSC, TPC, and FC compared to fresh juice.
Sonicated peel extract showed an IC50 value of 130±4.5 μg mL-1 against MCF-7
cells, while VERO (healthy) cells had values >1,000 μg mL-1. Sonication was
identified as the most effective extraction method for the antiproliferative
activity of pomegranate fruit. The study revealed that SPL induced apoptosis via
the p21, p53-dependent, caspase 8 pathways, and caspase 3-independent mechanisms
in MCF-7 cells.
CONCLUSION: Findings emphasize the potential therapeutic effects of SPL in the
antiproliferative effect of  MCF-7 cells by modulating caspase 8, p53, and
p21-dependent pathways, without activating caspase 3.
BACKGROUND: The management of capecitabine-related hand-foot syndrome (HFS) is
critical to avoid progression of the syndrome through early detection and early
response; management of HFS involves joint medication management by physicians
and pharmacists (hospital and community pharmacists). This study aimed to
evaluate the effectiveness of collaborative medication management in cancer
patients with HFS by comparing its effectiveness with the traditional response
using monitoring reports from community pharmacists.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Medical records of 120 breast cancer patients who received
capecitabine therapy between September 2017 and August 2023 were retrospectively
reviewed. Ninety-four patients who received 6 cycles of capecitabine therapy
were included. Patients who received care with co-medication management were
considered the co-medication group.
RESULTS: A total of 93 patients were included. The cumulative incidence of Grade
2 or higher HFS was 6% in the intervention group and 68% in the non-intervention
group (p<0.0001). In addition, when examining factors associated with the
development of Grade 2 or higher HFS, the investigators identified 68 years of
age or older (OR: 3.07 ;1.06-8.88, p=0.039) and continuous pharmacist
intervention (OR: 0.070 ;0.0048-0.97, p=0.047).
CONCLUSIONS: The findings indicate that pharmacist co-management is an effective
activity for capecitabine-related HFS to avoid increasing the severity of the
disease.
BACKGROUND: The diagnosis and treatment of breast cancer are very distressing
for young women and can result in a lot of unmet psychosocial needs and a lower
quality of life.
OBJECTIVE: Although unmet psychosocial needs in young women with breast cancer
can negatively impact their quality of life, these needs have not been
systematically reviewed. The primary objective of this scoping review was to
identify the categories of unmet psychosocial needs among young women with
breast cancer. The secondary objective was to examine the relationship between
these unmet psychosocial needs and their quality of life.
METHODS: Five electronic databases (MEDLINE from the National Library of
Medicine, Cumulative Index of Nursing and Allied Health Literature (CINAHL),
SCOPUS, Web of Science WOS, and Google Scholar), as well as reference lists of
relevant literature were systematically searched to identify the relevant
literature following the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and
Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) statement for reporting systematic reviews.
RESULTS: From an initial yield of 2505 articles, 30 articles were included and
analyzed. The results identified 13 main domains of unmet psychosocial needs
among young women with breast cancer: information needs, psychological needs,
physical/symptoms needs, fear of recurrence and spreading, identity-related
needs, social needs, sexual needs, social support, financial support, practical
needs, spiritual needs, communication-related issues with health care providers,
and coping needs. Data were extracted and summarized in a narrative synthesis.
CONCLUSION: Ongoing assessment of informational needs and a clear understanding
of the relationship between unmet psychosocial needs and quality of life are
essential for healthcare providers to develop robust support systems for young
women with breast cancer.
BACKGROUND: Post-mastectomy lymphedema is a common complication following breast
cancer surgery, characterized by the accumulation of lymphatic fluid, causing
swelling, discomfort, and functional limitations in the affected arm.
Traditional treatments for lymphedema include manual lymphatic drainage and
compression garments, but their effectiveness is variable, and many patients do
not achieve satisfactory outcomes. Emerging therapeutic modalities such as
Low-Level Laser Therapy (LLLT), Kinesio Taping, and Endermology offer potential
non-invasive treatment alternatives. However, the relative efficacy of these
approaches in reducing lymphedema, improving limb function, and enhancing
quality of life in post-mastectomy patients remains unclear.
OBJECTIVE: This study aims to determine the effects of low-level laser therapy,
kinesio taping, and endermology on breast cancer patients post-mastectomy with
lymphedema.
METHODS: A systematic review and meta-analysis were conducted based on PRISMA
guidelines. Searches were carried out in databases using keywords. Inclusion and
exclusion criteria were applied to select the studies to be included. The
selected studies were critically appraised using Cochrane's critical appraisal
tool. The chosen studies were extracted and analysed both qualitatively and
quantitatively. Quantitative analysis was performed using both fixed-effects and
random-effects approaches.
RESULTS: Eighteen studies were included in this analysis. All studies were
randomized trials with good quality based on critical appraisal. The analysis
found a significantly greater reduction in arm volume in the combined
intervention group (MD = 76.27; 95% CI = 33.84-118.69) and in each therapy
group: low-level laser therapy (MD = 91.98; 95% CI = 41.99-141.97) and
endermology (MD = 34.61; 95% CI = 20.81-48.41). However, there were no
significant differences in the reduction of arm circumference or pain scale,
either overall or for each therapy individually.
CONCLUSION: Low-level laser therapy and endermology provide better outcomes for
breast cancer patients with post-mastectomy lymphedema compared to conventional
therapy.
BACKGROUND: The combination of different MRI methods is described as
multiparametric MRI (mpMRI) and plays a significant role in breast cancer
diagnostics. Currently, mpMRI includes contrast-enhanced and diffusion-weighted
MRI. For a more comprehensive characterization of the key processes involved in
cancer development, additional MRI methods that capture functional processes at
the cellular and molecular levels are necessary. In the context of preclinical
studies, MRI methods that enable contrast-free evaluation of key processes at
the metabolic and molecular levels are being developed for future clinical
applications.
OBJECTIVES: What does multiparametric MRI in breast cancer look like in the
future?
METHODS: Systematic literature analysis focusing on preclinical research with
regard to mpMRI as well as development and modification of noninvasive MRI
methods.
RESULTS: Some of the most promising MRI methods for the evaluation of breast
cancer that can answer functional and metabolic questions are BOLD (blood oxygen
level dependent), IVIM (intravoxel incoherent motion), DMI (deuterium metabolic
imaging) and CEST (chemical exchange saturation transfer). A combination and,
therefore, a multiparametric approach allows for a noninvasive differentiation
of breast cancer subtypes and early detection of treatment response which is
crucial for the future development of the disease.
CONCLUSION: Standardization of quantification methods as well as improvement and
expansion of MRI methods enable such a multiparametric, functional, and
metabolic evaluation of the tumor. Many of these are initially developed in
preclinical settings before they can be translated into clinical practice.
BACKGROUND: The lifetime risk of pancreatic cancer in women with a germline
mutation in BRCA1 and BRCA2 is not well established. In an international
prospective cohort of female carriers of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations, the
cumulative incidence of pancreatic cancer from age 40 until 80 years was
estimated.
METHODS: A total of 8295 women with a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation were followed for
new cases of pancreatic cancer. Subjects were followed from the date of baseline
questionnaire or age 40 years (whichever came last) until a new diagnosis of
pancreatic cancer, death from another cause, or date of last follow-up.
RESULTS: Thirty-four incident pancreatic cancer cases were identified in the
cohort. The annual risk of pancreatic cancer between age 40 and 80 years was
0.04% for BRCA1 carriers and 0.09% for BRCA2 carriers. Via the Kaplan-Meier
method, the cumulative incidence from age 40 to 80 years was 2.2% (95% CI,
1.1%-4.3%) for BRCA1 carriers and 2.7% (95% CI, 1.3%-5.4%) for BRCA2 carriers.
Only two of the 34 cases reported a first-degree relative with pancreatic cancer
(hazard ratio, 4.75; 95% CI, 1.13-19.9; p = .03). Risk factors for pancreatic
cancer included alcohol intake and a history of diabetes. The 5-year survival
rate for the 34 cases was 8.8%.
CONCLUSIONS: The lifetime risk of pancreatic cancer is approximately 2% in women
with a BRCA1 mutation and 3% for women with a BRCA2 mutation. The poor survival
in hereditary pancreatic cancer underscores the need for novel antitumoral
strategies.
BACKGROUND: Peripherally inserted central catheters (PICC) are increasingly used
in clinical practice, which also leads to an increased incidence of PICC-related
thrombosis. Local thrombus formation could be prevented by limb ischemic
preconditioning (IPC). This study aimed to determine whether IPC can prevent
deep vein thrombosis in patients with PICC.
METHODS: A total of 600 breast cancer patients receiving PICC were randomized
into two groups between July 2016 and July 2018 at the Department of Radiation
Oncology. In the preconditioning group, 5 min of ischemic preconditioning was
performed three times before PICC, whereas no preconditioning was performed in
the sham group. The coagulation function levels, the PICC-related complications,
the length of hospital stay, the cost of hospitalization, and the satisfaction
of patients were compared.
RESULTS: The coagulation function levels of patients in the preconditioning
group were more normal than in patients from the sham group. In total, 56/300
patients in the sham group had presence of PICC-related thrombosis, with only
23/300 in the IPC group, with no significant difference in other complications
between the two groups. However, a longer hospital stay was observed in the sham
group compared to the IPC group. Moreover, the cost of hospitalization was also
reduced in the IPC group, which also improved the satisfaction of patients.
CONCLUSION: Limb ischemic preconditioning may attenuate the severity of vein
thrombosis in patients with PICC, which contributes to reducing the incidence of
PICC-related thrombosis in clinical practice.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer remains the most common invasive cancer in women
worldwide. Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive subtype with
limited treatment options. Trastuzumab (Tz) is typically used to treat
HER2-positive breast cancers, but its potential in TNBC is unclear.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate the effects of trastuzumab on cell viability,
apoptosis, cell cycle progression, and gene expression in TNBC cell lines
compared with HER2-positive and normal cell lines.
DESIGN: This is an in vitro experimental pre-clinical study using cultured
cancer cell lines.
METHODS: MDA-MB-231 and 4T1 (TNBC), MCF-7 (HER2-positive), and HSF (normal) cell
lines were treated with 20 μg/mL trastuzumab for 24 hours. Cell viability was
assessed by 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT)
assay, apoptosis by flow cytometry, cell cycle progression by DNA content
analysis, and gene expression by qPCR.
RESULTS: Trastuzumab significantly reduced cell viability and induced apoptosis
in TNBC cell lines, comparable to effects in HER2-positive MCF-7 cells. Cell
cycle analysis revealed G2/M phase arrest in TNBC cells. Gene expression
analysis showed upregulation of ERBB2, NOTCH1, EGFR, PIK3CA, and PTEN in
MDA-MB-231 cells, while 4T1 cells exhibited downregulation of most genes except
BACKGROUND: HER2-targeting therapies may increase the risk of decreased left
ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), potentially leading to heart failure. The
growing number of breast cancer survivors due to HER2-targeted treatments
necessitates long-term cardiotoxicity management.
METHOD: This retrospective study included HER2-positive breast cancer patients
aged 18 or older who received at least 1 dose of HER2-targeting treatment
between 2016 and 2020. The primary endpoint was the incidence of cardiotoxicity,
defined as LVEF <50% with a 10% decline, LVEF drop by >15%, or onset of
symptomatic heart failure. Secondary endpoints included the proportion of
patients with baseline LVEF 50% to 55% developing cardiotoxicity, those
discontinuing HER2 therapy due to heart failure, those treated with heart
failure medications, and those continuing HER2 therapy while on heart failure
medications. Another secondary outcome was the development of a hospital
protocol for monitoring cardiotoxicity in these patients.
RESULTS: A total of 212 patients were included, with a median age of 56.5 years
(interquartile range: 43-58 years). Twenty-two patients (10.37%) experienced
cardiotoxicity from HER2-targeted treatment. Thirteen patients (6.13%) had
asymptomatic heart failure with LVEF decrease of more than 10% to less than 50%.
Five patients (2.35%) with LVEF less than 40% had asymptomatic heart failure,
while 4 patients (1.88%) had symptomatic heart failure regardless of LVEF
decline. HER2-targeted treatment was temporarily discontinued in 3 (13.63%)
patients and permanently in 4 (18.18%) patients due to cardiotoxicity. The
remaining 15 patients resumed treatment without interruption. Only 13 out of 22
patients were referred to cardiologists and prescribed heart failure
medications.
CONCLUSION: Close monitoring of LVEF in patients receiving HER2-targeting
therapy can help health care providers initiate anti-heart failure medications
to prevent LVEF deterioration and maintain HER2-targeting therapy.
BACKGROUND: The term "Multiple Primary Malignant Neoplasms (MPMNs)" refers to
two or more unrelated primary malignant neoplasms that originate from single or
different organs and occur in one patient. MPMNs have been divided into
synchronous and metachronous based on time duration after first malignancy.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This was a hospital-based retrospective study conducted
at a tertiary cancer institute in Northeast India. Clinicopathological factors
of patients with multiple primary malignancies with at least one female genital
tract malignancy attending the gynecological oncology outpatient department were
observed. Those with ambiguous status of primary malignancy and incomplete
treatment of first primary malignancy were excluded from the study.
RESULTS: A total of 57 patients with MPMN, including one case of triple primary
malignancy, were included in the study. 59.18% of cases had metachronous, and
40.81% had synchronous malignancies. The median time to the development of
second primary malignancy was 60 months. Among the first diagnosed malignancies,
cervix was the most common site (26.5%), followed by endometrium (20.4%) and
ovary (14.28%), whereas ovarian malignancy was more commonly diagnosed second
malignancy (38.77%), followed by endometrium (14.28%) and cervix (10.2%). In an
analysis of synchronous malignancies, the most common genital tract involvement
was seen with endometrium and ovary, with a predominance of low-grade
endometrioid histology in 75% of cases.
CONCLUSIONS: As the cancer survivor population continues to increase in future,
these patients must be comprehensively evaluated on follow-up, and a cognizance
of prior treatment taken should be kept. In addition, it is vital that the
clinicians keep a lookout for high-risk population in which genetic testing may
be beneficial.
BACKGROUND: Breast thermography originated in the 1950s but was later abandoned
due to the contradictory results obtained in the following decades. However,
advances in infrared technology and image processing algorithms in the
twenty-first century led to a renewed interest in thermography. This work aims
to provide an updated and objective picture of the recent scientific evidence on
its effectiveness, both as a screening and as a diagnostic tool.
METHODS: We searched for clinical studies published between 2001 and May 31,
2023, in the databases PubMed and Scopus, that aimed to evaluate the
effectiveness of digital, long-wave infrared imaging for detecting breast
cancer. Additional documents were retrieved from the studies included in the
systematic reviews that resulted from the search and by searching for the names
of commercial systems. We limited our selection to studies that reported the
sensitivity and specificity of breast thermography (or the data needed to
calculate them) using images collected by themselves, with at least five breast
cancer cases. Studies that considered breast diseases other than cancer to be
positive or that did not use standard tests to set the ground truth diagnosis
were excluded, as well as articles written in a language other than English and
documents we could not access. We also conducted meta-analyses of proportions of
the sensitivity and specificity values reported in the selected studies and a
bivariate meta-analysis to account for the correlation between these metrics.
RESULTS: Our systematic search resulted in 22 studies, with an average pooled
sensitivity and specificity of 88.5% and 71.8%, respectively. However, the
differences in patient recruitment, sample size, imaging protocol, equipment,
and interpretation criteria yielded a high heterogeneity measure (79.3% and
99.1% I2 value, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, thermography showed a high sensitivity in the selected
studies, whereas specificity started off lower and increased over time. The most
recent studies reported a combination of sensitivity and specificity comparable
to standard diagnostic tests. Most of the selected studies were small and tend
to include only patients with a suspicious mass that requires biopsy. However,
larger studies with a wider variety of patient types (asymptomatic, women with
dense breasts, etc.) have been published in the latest years.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is the most common diagnosed disease, and the second
leading cause of death among women. Thus, due to its importance, the current
research is aimed at identifying the preferences of individuals for improving
breast cancer screening programs and the related policies.
METHOD: A systematic search was applied on databases including - PubMed, Scopus,
the Web of Science, Embase, Cochrane, SID- up to October 2022. The including
articles were original or review papers that assessed individuals' willingness
to pay. Also, articles including the effective variables or attributes for
breast cancer screening program were included. Meta-analysis was applied to
calculate Willingness to Pay (WTP) as a mean for breast cancer screening
followed by vote-counting for identifying the variables and attributes
correlated with screening.
RESULTS: A total of 721 articles were identified during the first phase. After
the screening process, thirteen papers were chosen, out of which, nine assessed
mammography as a breast cancer screening program. The results of random effect
meta-analysis on the including studies indicated that the rate of willingness to
pay for screening was 0.28% of GDP per capita (95%CI: 0.14-0.43), which was
found to be statistically significant. The result of stratified meta- analysis
indicated that the rate of willingness to pay for screening was 0.22% of GDP per
capita (95%CI: 0.07-0.37), which was found to be statistically significant.
Generally, income was the basic factor for receiving screening services, and
cost was an effective attribute for participating in screening programs.
CONCLUSIONS: To increase women's participation in breast cancer screening
programs; it is essential to provide legitimate information and eliminate the
barriers to women's non-participation. Offering rapid tests at low costs in
healthcare centers (both in terms of travel and screening time) delivered by
female staff can lead to an increase in women's willingness to participate in
breast cancer screening programs.
BACKGROUND: Since ancient times many traditional medicine systems around the
world have been using different parts of Annona muricata L. (AM), to treat
cancer. Indeed, numerous in vitro and in vivo studies also have shown anticancer
properties of different solvent extracts of different parts of AM. Even the same
part of the plant has shown different levels of anticancer properties based on
geographical variations. Therefore, in the present study, the anticancer
potential of the leaves, fruit pulp and the fruit peel of the AM that is grown
in Sri Lanka was comparatively analyzed with the intention of identifying the
most suitable part to be developed into a nutraceutical with anticancer effects.
METHODS: Freeze-dried aqueous extracts of immature leaves (ILAM), mature leaves
(MLAM), pulp (PAM) and peel (PLAM) of AM were analyzed for their antioxidant
activity using 1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) radical scavenging and
2,2-azinobis-3-ethylbenzothiozoline-6-sulfonic acid (ABTS) cation decolorization
assays. Their cytotoxicity on breast cancer (MCF-7) cells, colorectal
adenocarcinoma (DLD-1) cells and normal human gingival fibroblasts (HGF-1) were
determined by the 3-(4,5- dimethylthiazole-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl-tetrazoliumbromide
(MTT) assay. Their effect on mRNA expression of proapoptotic (Bax and caspase-7)
and cell cycle arresting (p21) genes was analyzed by RT- qPCR in the same cell
lines.
RESULTS: ILAM demonstrated the highest antioxidant activity in both DPPH and
ABTS assays followed by MLAM, PLAM and PAM. In the MTT assay, both ILAM and MLAM
demonstrated strong cytotoxic activity against MCF-7 and DLD-1 cell lines while
there were no cytotoxic effects on the normal human cell line HGF-1. Both ILAM
and MLAM demonstrated concentration-dependent upregulation of mRNA expression of
cell cycle arresting gene p21 and apoptosis inducing genes Bax and caspase-7 in
MCF-7 and DLD-1 cells.
CONCLUSION: The AEAM leaves grown in Sri Lanka has significantly higher
antioxidant activity as well as selective cytotoxic effects on MCF-7 and DLD-1
cancer cells compared to its PL and P counterparts. Further, the AEAM leaves
induced mRNA expression of the anticancer genes p21, Bax and caspase-7,
indicating its potential to be developed into an anticancer drug against breast
and colorectal cancer.
BACKGROUND: Leptin, an energy balance regulator secreted by adipocytes,
increases metastatic potential of breast cancer cells. The impact on cancer cell
metabolism remains unclear given that most studies of leptin and breast cancer
cell metabolism utilize supraphysiological glucose concentrations.
METHODS: Using two murine models of metastatic triple-negative breast cancer
(TNBC) differing in genetic alterations (4T1: p53 and Pik3ca mutations;
metM-Wntlung: increased Wnt signaling) and cultured in physiological (5 mM)
glucose media, we tested the hypothesis that leptin increases migration of
metastatic breast cancer cells through regulation of glucose metabolism.
RESULTS: Our results showed that leptin treatment, compared with vehicle,
increased cell migration in each cell line, with decreased leptin receptor
(Ob-R) mRNA expression in 4T1, but not metM-Wntlung, cells. AMP-activated
protein kinase (AMPK) was activated in 4T1 with leptin treatment but decreased
in metM-Wntlung. Leptin decreased fatty acid synthase (Fasn) and carnitine
palmitoyltransferase 1a (Cpt1a) mRNA expression in 4T1 cells but increased their
expression in metM-Wntlung cells. Fatty acid oxidation was not necessary for
leptin-induced migration in either cell line. Leptin increased palmitate
synthesis from glucose in metM-Wntlung, but not 4T1 cells. Moreover, although
leptin increased glucose transporter 1 (Glut1) mRNA expression in both cell
lines and inhibition of glycolysis blocked leptin-induced migration in
metM-Wntlung, but not 4T1 cells.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, these results demonstrate that at physiological
glucose concentrations, leptin increases migration of 4T1 and metM-Wntlung cells
via shared and distinct effects on energy metabolism, suggesting that the type
of TNBC genetic alteration plays a role in differential metabolic regulation of
leptin-induced migration.
BACKGROUND: Fagonia cretica L. (Family: Zygophyllaceae), is a wild shrub mostly
found in Mediterranean districts and extensively used in folk medicine for a
vast array of purposes such as antidiabetic and anticancer during the early
stages. The goal of the current study was to validate the antioxidant,
anti-inflammatory, and cytotoxic properties of Egyptian F. cretica using in
vitro studies, metabolic profiling, and in silico approaches.
METHODS: The plant was collected from the Egyptian desert and the alcoholic
extract was prepared from its aerial parts, total phenolic and total flavonoid
contents were evaluated spectrophotometrically. Antioxidant potential was
assessed via 1,1 diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) scavenging activity.
Anti-inflammatory activity was validated through in vitro COX-2, COX-1, and
nitric oxide inhibition. Cytotoxicity was tested against liver (HepG2), breast
(MCF-7), and intestinal (CACO2) carcinoma cell lines followed by assessment of
its impact on the levels of apoptotic markers namely topoisomerase I and caspase
9 enzymes. Chemical profiling of the extract was performed using LC-HRMS
technique. Saponin rich extract was prepared and tested for affecting topo I and
caspase 9 enzymes. In silico studies were conducted on anti-inflammatory (COX-2
and COX-1) and cytotoxicity (topoisomerases I, IIα, and IIβ) targets using
Autodock vina in PyRx platform.
RESULTS: Total phenolic and total flavonoid content of the extract were
2.4 ± 0.12 mg GAE/g and 0.18 ± 0.01 mg RE/g, respectively. In vitro results
revealed antioxidant activity calculated as 1.4 ± 0.1 mg AEAC/g. In vitro
anti-inflammatory assays unveiled inhibition of COX-2 and COX-1 enzymes with
IC50 values of 13.02 ± 0.61 and 26.51 ± 0.83 µg/ml, respectively and nitric
oxide with IC50 of 147.05 ± 9.61 µg/ml. Cytotoxicity on MCF-7, HepG2, and CACO2
cell line with IC50 values of 6.9 ± 0.53, 7.6 ± 0.42, and 9.2 ± 0.35 µg/ml,
respectively, in addition to in vitro topoisomerase I inhibition
(IC50 = 13.57 ± 0.71 µg/ml) and caspase 9 induction by 5.66 folds. Metabolic
profiling using LC-HRMS technique resulted in dereplication of 21 compounds
including triterpenoid saponins, flavonoids, diterpenoids, etc. Interestingly,
saponin rich fraction and non-saponin fraction exhibited similar effects on
topoisomerase I and caspase 9. In silico investigation unveiled high binding
affinities of almost all the detected metabolites to the active sites of COX-2,
COX-1, topo I, IIα, and IIβ enzymes.
CONCLUSION: Collectively, we can conclude that F. cretica is a new source of
many phytochemicals, and a significant natural source as cytotoxic and
anti-inflammatory agent.
BACKGROUND: Individuals with normal weight obesity (NWO) often escape the
attention of healthcare providers who may assume that a normal body mass index
(BMI) correlates with low health risks. However, it remains unknown whether NWO
increases the risk of breast cancer.
METHODS: This study included 22,257 and 52,506 pre- and postmenopausal females
with normal BMI in the UK Biobank. NWO was defined as participants with a normal
BMI (18.5-24.9 kg/m2) and an excess percent body fat (PBF > 33.3%). Cox
proportional hazard models were used to investigate the associations of NWO and
NWO-related biomarkers with incident breast cancer.
RESULTS: NWO was not associated with premenopausal breast cancer, whereas it was
associated with a higher risk of postmenopausal breast cancer (hazard
ratio = 1.19, 95% CI: 1.08-1.31). In our meta-analysis, per 5-unit increment in
percent body fat level was linked to a 15% (95% CI: 10-19%) elevated risk of
postmenopausal breast cancer in females with normal BMI. Stratified analyses
showed a stronger positive association in females with higher genetic risk. In
our NWO-biomarkers analyses, NWO was linked to 34 identified biomarkers, of
which three inflammation markers (monocyte count, neutrophil count, and
C-reactive protein), and one ketone body metabolite (β-Hydroxybutyrate) also
indicated a positive association with postmenopausal breast cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: NWO is associated with an increased risk of postmenopausal breast
cancer, indicating that relying solely on BMI neglects the higher risk faced by
non-obese postmenopausal women.
BACKGROUND: Mastectomy skin flap ischemia is a well-known postoperative
complication following mastectomy and breast reconstruction. Hyperbaric oxygen
therapy (HBOT) has shown promising results for reducing the adverse effects
associated with mastectomy skin flap ischemia and associated necrosis; however,
there is paucity of literature regarding the indications for HBOT following
breast cancer surgery. This study aimed to assess HBOT efficacy in treating and
mitigating complications from postoperative tissue ischemia. Secondarily, it
explored how patient-related factors may impact the success of HBOT.
METHODS: A retrospective analysis was conducted from January 2018 to October
2023. The study analyzed 23 patients at a single institution who were treated
with HBOT for diagnosed skin flap ischemia following mastectomy and immediate
breast reconstruction. Patient demographics, preoperative, and operative details
were collected, as well as postoperative outcomes. The authors deemed HBOT a
"success" if there were no major complications and a "failure" if there was ≥1
major complication reported within 6 months following the last HBOT treatment.
Logistic regression modeled the odds of HBOT success as a function of patient
characteristics.
RESULTS: HBO was deemed a success in 15/23 patients (65 ​%) and a failure in
8/23 (35 ​%). Of the successes, 11 received immediate post-operative HBOT.
Average age at surgery was 49 years, average BMI was 24, and average number of
HBOT treatments was 11. Logistic regression analysis revealed that preceding
minor complications and age both trended towards significance regarding their
impact on HBO outcome. Odds of success decreased by 92 ​% in the presence of
minor complications (OR ​= ​0.08; p ​< ​0.09) and increased by 15 ​% with every
1-year increase in age (OR ​= ​1.16; p ​< ​0.07) CONCLUSIONS: In this
retrospective analysis, HBOT was successful in treating postoperative mastectomy
skin flap ischemia and preventing major complications in the majority of
patients. Notably, age at time of surgery and presence of minor complications
were the only variables found to potentially impact the success of HBOT. Future
studies on a larger scale are needed to better evaluate HBOT's therapeutic
utility in mastectomy flap necrosis.
BACKGROUND: With improvements in cancer treatment and early detection, the
number of people living with cancer is increasing.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to investigate the association between combined
prediagnostic lifestyle factors, assessed by a Healthy Lifestyle Index (HLI)
score, and mortality among women diagnosed with breast cancer (BC), colorectal
cancer (CRC) and lung cancer (LC).
DESIGN: Prospective cohort.
SETTING: Women residing in Norway, general population.
PARTICIPANTS: Our analysis included 5032, 2468 and 1594 women from the Norwegian
Women and Cancer study diagnosed with BC, CRC and LC, respectively, who
responded to a questionnaire between 1996 and 2014.
EXPOSURE MEASURES: HLI score measured prior to cancer diagnosis. The HLI
combines physical activity level, body mass index, smoking behaviour, alcohol
consumption and dietary habits.
OUTCOME MEASURES: We estimated HRs and 95% CIs using Cox proportional hazard
models for all-cause and site-specific cancer mortality.
RESULTS: After median follow-up times of 9.8, 7.1 and 5.9 years for BC, CRC and
LC cases, respectively, there were 912, 902 and 1094 all-cause deaths; and 509
BC deaths, 679 CRC deaths and 961 LC deaths. For women diagnosed with BC, a
1-point HLI score increment was associated with a 6% lower all-cause mortality
rate (HR: 0.94, 95% CI: 0.92 to 0.97). The data were compatible with no
association for the estimated 3% lower BC mortality rate (HR: 0.97, 95% CI: 0.94
to 1.00) among women diagnosed with BC, and for the estimated 3% lower all-cause
(HR: 0.97, 95% CI: 0.95 to 1.00) and 2% lower CRC mortality rates (HR: 0.98, 95%
CI: 0.95 to 1.01) among women diagnosed with CRC. For women diagnosed with LC,
prediagnostic HLI score was not associated with all-cause (HR: 1.00, 95% CI:
0.98 to 1.02) or LC mortality rates (HR: 1.00, 95% CI: 0.98 to 1.03).
CONCLUSIONS: We observed that a higher HLI score measured before cancer
diagnosis was associated with lower all-cause and, possibly, lower BC mortality
among Norwegian women diagnosed with BC; and a possible lower all-cause and CRC
mortality among those diagnosed with CRC. Smoking was likely responsible for the
observed associations.
BACKGROUND: The relationship between tumor necrosis factor-α inhibitors (TNFi)
and cancer risk is complex, given their pivotal role in managing chronic
inflammatory conditions. Persistent concerns about TNFi therapy potentially
increasing cancer risk necessitate a thorough understanding of its long-term
effects on cancer development in patients with psoriasis to guide therapeutic
decision-making.
OBJECTIVES: This systematic review and meta-analysis aimed to evaluate the
association between long-term TNFi therapy and cancer risk in patients with
psoriasis.
METHODS: Data were collected from PubMed, Embase, and the Cochrane Library, from
their inception to January 1, 2024. The studies included adults with psoriasis
or psoriatic arthritis receiving TNFi, presenting standardized incidence ratio
(SIR) data for cancer. Data extraction followed PRISMA guidelines, with
independent extraction by two authors, and pooled data synthesis was conducted
using a random-effects model. The primary outcomes were SIRs for all cancers
excluding non-melanoma skin carcinoma (NMSC) and for NMSC itself. The secondary
outcome was the SIR of specific cancer types.
RESULTS: The meta-analysis included eight studies with a total of 32,765
psoriasis patients. The pooled results showed no increased risk of cancers,
including all cancers excluding NMSC, melanoma, lymphoma, prostate cancer, and
breast cancer, among individuals receiving long-term TNFi therapy for psoriasis
compared to the general population. However, subgroup analysis found an elevated
risk of NMSC in patients with psoriatic arthritis and a significant increase in
the risk of squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) among psoriasis patients treated with
TNFi compared to the general population (SIR, 1.84; 95% CI, 1.16 - 2.92 and SIR,
2.84; 95% CI, 1.64 - 4.91, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Our systematic review and meta-analysis indicate that most cancers
examined did not demonstrate an increased risk following long-term TNFi therapy
in psoriasis patients. However, for patients with psoriatic arthritis or those
at high risk of SCC, these findings underscore the importance of personalized
treatment strategies that weigh individual risks and benefits.
BACKGROUND: Two common surgical approaches for breast cancer are
breast-conserving surgery and mastectomy with implant-based breast
reconstruction (MIBR). However, for large tumors, an alternative to MIBR is
oncoplastic surgery with volume replacement (OPSVR). We performed a
comprehensive analysis comparing OPSVR with MIBR, with our aim to focus on the
30-days post-operative complications between these two techniques.
METHODS: We conducted a retrospective cohort study using the National Surgical
Quality Improvement Program (NSQIP) database from 2005 to 2020. Only breast
cancer patients were included and were divided according to the surgical
technique: OPSVR and MIBR. Logistic regression analysis was used to assess
independent risk factors for total, surgical, and wound complications.
RESULTS: A cohort of 8,403 breast cancer patients was analyzed. 683 underwent
OPSVR and 7,720 underwent MIBR. From 2005 to 2020, the adoption of OPSVR
gradually increased over the years (p<0.001), whereas MIBR decreased. OPSVR
patients were older (57.04 vs. 51.89 years, p<0.001), exhibited a higher BMI
(31.73 vs. 26.93, p<0.001), had a greater prevalence of diabetes mellitus (11.0%
vs. 5.0%, p<0.001). They also had a higher ASA classification (2.33 vs. 2.15,
p<0.001), shorter operative time (173.39 vs. 216.20 min, p<0.001), and a higher
proportion of outpatient procedures (83.7% vs 39.5%, p<0.001). Outcome analysis
demonstrated fewer total complications in the OPSVR patients, (4.2% vs. 10.9%,
p<0.001), including lower rates of surgical complications (2.2% vs 8.0%,
p<0.001) and wound complications (1.9% vs. 4.8%, p=0.005) compared to MIBR
patients. Multivariate analysis identified OPSVR as an independent protective
factor for total, surgical, and wound complications.
CONCLUSION: OPSVR has become a favorable technique for patients with breast
cancer. Even in patients with higher comorbidities, OPSVR demonstrates safe and
better outcomes when compared to MIBR. It should be considered a reasonable and
safe breast surgical option in the appropriate patient.
BACKGROUND: Predictors of response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NACT) and
endocrine therapy (NET) in hormone receptor-positive (HoR+)/human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-negative breast cancer (BC) are required. Also,
pathological and molecular changes induced by both strategies and their impact
on patients' outcomes have not been reported so far.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: In a cohort of 186 patients with early-stage
HoR+/HER2-negative BC treated with NACT or NET, we assessed the association of
baseline main clinicopathological features and PAM50 gene expression (GE),
intrinsic subtypes (IS) and risk-of-relapse (ROR-P) score with pathological
outcomes according to treatment strategy. Molecular NACT/NET-induced changes
were described and compared, along with their associations with event-free
survival (EFS). Comparison of the two cohorts after propensity score matching
(PSM) was used as sensitivity analysis. Molecular changes were confirmed in cell
lines.
RESULTS: NACT was associated with higher rates of residual cancer burden
(RCB)-0/I than NET in the overall population (38.2% versus 13.5%, P < 0.001) and
after PSM (P = 0.036). PAM50 non-luminal IS were the only independent and
positive predictor of RCB-0/I (P = 0.024) in the NACT cohort, while MMP11
messenger RNA levels were the only independent and negative predictor (P =
0.014) in the NET cohort. Both treatments shifted the tumor types toward less
aggressive forms (i.e. PAM50 luminal A/normal-like), lowered the risk of
recurrence in terms of ROR-P, up-regulated selected immune genes and PAM50
basal-like-related genes/signature and significantly downregulated
proliferation-/luminal-/HER2-related genes/signatures, though NACT more than
NET. Molecular findings were confirmed after PSM. A net reduction in
proliferation-related genes and ROR-P was confirmed in cell lines with
chemotherapy and endocrine therapy. Different baseline molecular features
associated with diverse kind of responses (ROR-P downstaging, Ki67 reduction or
pathological responses) with NACT and NET. Decreasing ROR-P and transitioning
the tumor subtype to resemble normal tissue (i.e. PAM50 normal-like) suggested
improved EFS.
CONCLUSIONS: NACT was more effective in the molecular and dimensional tumor
'downstaging' than NET but baseline molecular features associated with
differential responses according to treatment strategy. Examining baseline and
post-treatment GE might help tailor more personalized and effective care.
BACKGROUND: In patients with right-sided breast cancer the liver can be
partially irradiated during adjuvant radiotherapy (RT). We aimed to determine
breast cancer RT effects on liver using with magnetic resonance elastography
(MRE) and biological results.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This retrospective study enrolled 34 patients diagnosed
with right-sided breast cancer who underwent adjuvant RT. Liver segment
assessments were conducted using MRE for all participants. Additionally, a
complete blood count and liver enzyme analysis were performed for each patient.
All measurements were taken both prior to the initiation and upon completion of
BACKGROUND: Deciphering spatial domains using spatially resolved transcriptomics
(SRT) is of great value for characterizing and understanding tissue
architecture. However, the inherent heterogeneity and varying spatial
resolutions present challenges in the joint analysis of multimodal SRT data.
RESULTS: We introduce a multimodal geometric deep learning method, named stMMR,
to effectively integrate gene expression, spatial location, and histological
information for accurate identifying spatial domains from SRT data. stMMR uses
graph convolutional networks and a self-attention module for deep embedding of
features within unimodality and incorporates similarity contrastive learning for
integrating features across modalities.
CONCLUSIONS: Comprehensive benchmark analysis on various types of spatial data
shows superior performance of stMMR in multiple analyses, including spatial
domain identification, pseudo-spatiotemporal analysis, and domain-specific gene
discovery. In chicken heart development, stMMR reconstructed the spatiotemporal
lineage structures, indicating an accurate developmental sequence. In breast
cancer and lung cancer, stMMR clearly delineated the tumor microenvironment and
identified marker genes associated with diagnosis and prognosis. Overall, stMMR
is capable of effectively utilizing the multimodal information of various SRT
data to explore and characterize tissue architectures of homeostasis,
development, and tumor.
BACKGROUND: Several authors hypothesized that normative values of breast related
quality of life in asymptomatic populations can be helpful to better understand
changes induced by surgery. Breast related quality of life can be associated to
breast anthropometry. This study was designed to explore this hypothesis, find
relevant correlations and, using machine learning techniques, predict values of
satisfaction with breast from easy body measurements.
METHODS: Asymptomatic women undergoing routine clinical examination for breast
cancer prevention were interviewed using the BREAST_Q V1 Breast Conserving
Surgery Pre-op. Descriptive statistics was performed to describe the
characteristics of the population. The Pearson correlation test defined
correlation between relevant anthropometric variables and scores in each domain
of the BREAST_Q. Regression analysis was employed to assess variation in the
"Satisfaction with breast" domain when looking at the mirror dressed or
undressed. Three machine learning algorithms were tested to predict scores in
the "Satisfaction with breast domain" given body mass index and nipple to
sternal notch distance.
RESULTS: One-hundred and twenty-five women underwent clinical examination and
assessment of anthropometry. The reply rate to the BREAST_Q ranged from 99.2 to
88% depending on the domains. The "satisfaction with breast" domain was
negatively associated either to BMI [rPearson = -0.28, CI (-0.41, -0.15)
p < 0.005] and Age [rPearson = -0.15, CI (-0.29, -6.52e-03) p = 0.04]. The N_SN
distance was also negatively associated to this domain with the following values
for the right [rPearson = -0.34, CI (-0.45, -0.21) p < 0.000] and left side
[rPearson = -0.31, CI (-0.43, -0.17) p < 0.000]. Linear regression analysis was
performed on questions 1 and 4 of the "Satisfaction with Breast" domain
revealing a steeper decrease for women with higher BMI values looking in the
mirror undressed (Adjusted R-squared BMI:
Dressed - 0.03329/Undressed - 0.08186). The combination of two parameters (BMI
and N_SN distance) generated the following accuracy values respectively for
three machine learning algorithms: MAP (Accuracy = 0.37, 95% CI: (0.2939,
0.4485)); Naïve Bayes (Accuracy = 0.70, 95% CI: (0.6292, 0.7755); SVM
(Accuracy = 0.63, 95% CI: (0.5515, 0.7061)).
CONCLUSIONS: This study generates normative scores for a Mediterranean
population of asymptomatic women and demonstrates relevant associations between
anthropometry and breast related quality of life. Machine learning techniques
may predict scores of the "satisfaction with breast" domain of the Breast_Q
using body mass index and nipple to sternal notch estimates as input. However,
the algorithm seems to fail in approximately one third of the sample probably
because is not able to capture many aspects of personal life. Much larger sample
and more qualitative research is required before establishing any direct
association between body estimates and quality of life. Clinical implications
are given.
BACKGROUND: Virtual reality (VR) can be an innovative method to reduce patients'
anxiety and support their psychological health.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the anxiety and distress-reducing effects of using
immersive VR (IVR) intervention in breast cancer patients undergoing
radiotherapy (RT).
METHODS: Sixty breast cancer patients undergoing RT were recruited for the
quasi-experimental study. The participants were divided into the intervention
group and the control group. Anxiety and distress, the primary outcome measures,
were assessed before the first and after the last radiation session using
reliable scales. Patients in the intervention group watched a tranquil forest
view with birdsong and meditation music during each RT session using IVR
goggles.
RESULTS: Both group patients had similar levels of anxiety and distress before
the start of RT. After the intervention, the anxiety and distress of the
patients in the intervention group decreased significantly compared with the
control group. In addition, treatment-related comfort was higher in the
intervention group. Overall, the majority of patients in the intervention group
expressed a high level of satisfaction with this IVR experience.
CONCLUSION: Patients who experienced an IVR intervention showed less anxiety and
distress, greater comfort, and higher satisfaction. This innovative technique
can be used as a practical solution to alleviate anxiety and distress in various
healthcare settings.
IMPLICATIONS FOR PRACTICE: Immersive VR can be used in treatment and care
interventions that cause anxiety and distress in oncology patients.
BACKGROUND: Biosimilars are products containing an approved biological medicine.
They are similar, but not identical, to an originator medicine. In cancer,
biosimilars have been developed from the monoclonal antibodies, bevacizumab,
rituximab, and trastuzumab. They have become available for the treatment of
lung, colorectal, non-Hodkin's lymphoma, and breast cancers. As these biological
products are not identical, synthesis of evidence of the clinical effects of
biosimilars compared to their originators is needed to understand their
comparative effectiveness and harms.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the benefits and harms of biosimilar monoclonal
antibodies versus their originator drugs for adults with cancer.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched bibliographic (CENTRAL, MEDLINE, Embase, Web of
Science) and clinical trials databases to February 2024.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included head-to-head randomised controlled trials
conducted in adults with cancer treated with biosimilar or originator monoclonal
antibodies.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: We followed standard Cochrane methodology. Primary
outcomes were progression-free survival, duration of response, overall survival,
breast cancer's pathological complete response, serious adverse events, and
health-related quality of life. If survival estimates were adjusted or provided
as rates, we did not combine them. We used Cochrane's RoB 1 tool to assess the
risk of bias and GRADE to evaluate the certainty of evidence of critical and
important outcomes according to the relevance determined by consumers.
MAIN RESULTS: We included 55 studies with 22,046 adults (23 of bevacizumab,
10,639 participants with colorectal or lung cancer; 17 of rituximab, 4412
participants with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma; and 15 of trastuzumab, 6995
participants with breast cancer). Studies were conducted in all continents, most
were multicentre, and all were funded by the drug manufacturer. Participants'
ages ranged from 47 (mean) to 62 (median) years and the proportion of women from
18% to 100%. Fifteen studies were conducted as non-inferiority and 40 as
equivalence. The overall risk of bias was low; main biases were in the
incomplete outcome data and selective reporting domains. Bevacizumab biosimilar
versus bevacizumab originator in lung or colorectal cancer Progression-free
survival is likely similar between bevacizumab biosimilar and the originator
(per 1000: 380 in both groups at 12 months, hazard ratio (HR) 1.00, 95%
confidence interval (CI) 0.91 to 1.09; 5 studies, 2660 participants;
moderate-certainty evidence). There were no differences in lung or colorectal
cancer subgroups. Bevacizumab biosimilar is likely similar to the originator in
duration of response (per 1000: 219 participants who achieved response
progressed with biosimilar versus 210 with originator at 12 months; HR 1.05, 95%
CI 0.81 to 1.37; 1 study, 762 participants; moderate-certainty evidence) and
overall survival (per 1000: 592 with biosimilar versus 610 with originator at 12
months; HR 1.06, 95% CI 0.94 to 1.19; 5 studies, 2783 participants;
moderate-certainty evidence). There were no differences in cancer type
subgroups. Bevacizumab biosimilar is likely similar to the originator in serious
adverse events (per 1000: 303 with biosimilar versus 309 with originator; risk
ratio (RR) 0.98, 95% CI 0.93 to 1.03; 23 studies, 10,619 participants;
moderate-certainty evidence). Bevacizumab biosimilar may be similar to
originator in health-related quality of life as scores were comparable in the
one study that assessed this outcome in metastatic colorectal cancer
(low-certainty evidence). This critical outcome was not assessed in other
biosimilars comparisons. Bevacizumab biosimilar is likely similar to originator
in objective response (per 1000: 481 with biosimilar versus 501 with originator;
RR 0.96, 95% CI 0.93 to 1.00; 23 studies, 10,054 participants;
moderate-certainty evidence) and mortality (per 1000: 287 with biosimilar versus
279 with originator; RR 1.03, 95% CI 0.97 to 1.09; 19 studies, 9231
participants; moderate-certainty evidence). There were no differences in lung or
colorectal cancers. Rituximab biosimilar versus rituximab originator in
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma Rituximab biosimilar is likely similar to originator in
progression-free survival (7 studies, 2456 participants), duration of response
(2 studies, 522 participants), and overall survival (7 studies, 2353
participants; data not pooled as survival estimates were adjusted for different
factors or reported as rates) (all moderate-certainty evidence). Rituximab
biosimilar is likely similar to originator in the risk of serious adverse events
(per 1000: 210 with biosimilar versus 204 with originator; RR 1.03, 95% CI 0.94
to 1.14; 15 studies, 4197 participants; moderate-certainty evidence) and
objective response (per 1000: 807 with biosimilar versus 799 with originator; RR
1.01, 95% CI 0.98 to 1.04; 16 studies, 3922 participants; moderate-certainty
evidence). No study reported quality of life. Rituximab biosimilar is similar to
originator in mortality (per 1000: 52 with biosimilar versus 53 with originator;
RR 0.97, 95% CI 0.70 to 1.35; 8 studies, 2557 participants; high-certainty
evidence). Trastuzumab biosimilar versus trastuzumab originator in breast cancer
Trastuzumab biosimilar is likely similar to originator in progression-free
survival (4 studies, 2221 participants), duration of response (3 studies, 1488
participants), and overall survival (6 studies, 2221 participants), which were
not pooled due to adjustment for different factors or provided as rates. No
study reported quality of life. Trastuzumab biosimilar may be similar to
originator in pathological complete response (per 1000: 459 with biosimilar
versus 433 with originator; RR 1.06, 95% CI 0.95 to 1.17; 7 studies, 3403
participants; low-certainty evidence), is likely similar in serious adverse
events (per 1000: 129 in both groups; RR 1.00, 95% CI 0.85 to 1.17; 13 studies,
6183 participants; moderate-certainty evidence), and slightly increases
objective response (per 1000: 801 with biosimilar versus 777 with originator; RR
1.03, 95% CI 1.01 to 1.05; 13 studies, 5509 participants; moderate-certainty
evidence).
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with bevacizumab, rituximab, and trastuzumab
biosimilars are likely similar to their originator drugs in terms of their
impact on progression-free survival, duration of response, overall survival,
serious adverse events, objective response, and mortality. Limited evidence
showed similarity in pathological complete response for trastuzumab and quality
of life for bevacizumab compared with originators, which was not assessed in the
other comparisons. The overall certainty of evidence was moderate and
imprecision was the main reason for downgrading our certainty in the findings.
BACKGROUND: Serous tubal intraepithelial carcinoma (STIC) lesions are the
precursor to high grade serous ovarian carcinomas (HGSC) which have the highest
mortality rate among gynecologic malignancies. Among women diagnosed with HGSC,
20% are found to be secondary to hereditary causes with the majority being
associated with germline pathogenic variants (PVs) in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes.
Patients with a PV are high risk for developing HGSC, so it is recommended that
they undergo risk reducing salpingo-oophorectomies in their 30s-40s.
Opportunistic salpingectomy is the only ovarian cancer prevention method
available for average risk patients. While STIC lesions are rare in average risk
women, studies quote incidental STIC lesion findings in 1-7% of patients
undergoing opportunistic salpingectomy.
CASE: A 38-year-old woman (gravida 2, para 2) of Nepalese ethnicity had an
incidental finding of a STIC lesion at the time of opportunistic salpingectomy
for permanent sterilization at cesarean delivery. The STIC lesion was found
using representative sampling of the fallopian tubes since the patient was
considered average risk for ovarian cancer. This method is much less sensitive
than SEE-FIM protocol which is used with known high-risk women. This ultimately
led to discovery of a BRCA1 mutation in the patient.
CONCLUSION: SEE-FIM protocol is used to identify STIC lesions, but it is not
routinely used on average risk patients' fallopian tubes. Using SEE-FIM protocol
would lead to less missed STICs, but it is unclear how much extra cost and
effort would be required to implement this. There are knowledge gaps when it
comes to understudied populations and hereditary breast and ovarian cancer
(HBOC) gene prevalence. Studies show that current BRCA prediction models
underestimate HBOC gene prevalence in Asian populations. Diagnosing STICs in
understudied populations could lead to the discovery of an HBOC PV which the
patient may not have discovered until after a cancer diagnosis. Identification
of a STIC in an average risk patient should lead to a referral for genetic
counseling and screening.
BACKGROUND: Myeloid Derived Suppressor Cells (MDSCs) are capable of inhibiting
both innate and adaptive immune responses and accumulate in the microenvironment
of breast tumors. Hence, MDSC depletion by chemotherapeutic agents can improve
clinical efficacy of cancer immunotherapy. The effects of 5-FU and doxorubicin
agents on MDSC reduction in 4T1 breast cancer murine model were evaluated.
METHODS: 5×105 of 4T1 tumor cells were injected into mammary fat pad of BALB/c
female mice. Tumor bearing mice were randomly divided into 4 groups: PBS
receiving control group, doxorubicin receiving groups at doses of 2.5 and 5
mg/kg, and 5-FU receiving group at dose of 50 mg/kg. Doxorubicin and 5-FU agents
were intraperitoneally administrated at three doses with 5-day intervals and
five doses for three times a week, respectively. Then, on day 20 post tumor
cells injection, spleens and tumors were isolated to determine frequency of
CD11b+ Gr1+ MDSCs by flow cytometry analysis.
RESULTS: 5-FU was able to reduce significantly both splenic and interatumoral
MDSCs comparing to control group (p=0.0276 and p=0.0067, respectively). Also,
Doxorubicin treatment at dose of 50 mg/kg was associated to a significant
reduction of splenic MDSCs in comparison to untreated group (p=0.0382). However,
only 5-FU injection led to inhibit notably tumor growth in comparison to control
group (p=0.0139).
CONCLUSION: Findings show that 5-FU has inhibitory effects on MDSCs and tumor
growth in 4T1 tumor model. So, more investigations are needed to study
combination of 5-FU with immune based approaches to enhance the efficacy of
cancer therapies.
BACKGROUND: Contraceptives play a crucial role in women's reproductive health,
their hormonal components may be linked to cancer risks, specifically breast,
and gynecological cancers. Given the high usage rates of hormonal
contraceptives, it is vital to systematically evaluate their potential impact on
cancer outcomes, especially among women with a family history of gynecological
cancers.
OBJECTIVES: This study aims to evaluate the evidence on the association between
modern contraceptive use and the risk of breast and reproductive cancers
(ovarian, endometrial, and cervical cancer) among women of reproductive age, to
inform healthcare providers, women, and program managers about cancer outcomes
related to contraceptive use.
METHODS: A systematic review was conducted according to PRISMA guidelines.
Searches were performed in databases such as CINAHL, OVID Medline, EMBASE, and
more from inception to February 2022. Eligible studies included randomized
controlled trials, cohort studies, and case-control studies that compared cancer
outcomes between contraceptive users and non-users. Data extraction, quality
assessment, and meta-analyses were conducted following predefined protocols.
Subgroup and sensitivity analyses examined variations in contraceptive methods,
doses, and duration.
RESULTS: A total of 51 studies were included, comprising 2 RCTs and 49
observational studies. The review identified a significant reduction in ovarian
and endometrial cancer incidence among contraceptive users. Hormonal
contraceptive users had a 36% lower risk of ovarian cancer (RR 0.64, 95% CI
0.60-0.68), with specific reductions seen in combined oral contraceptive users
(RR 0.62, 95% CI 0.57-0.68) and hormonal IUD users (RR 0.68, 95% CI 0.48-0.96).
The rate ratio of cervical cancer was higher among non- users compared to
hormonal contraceptive users when we pooled the results (1.28, 95% CI 1.21,
1.35). No significant association was found between contraceptive use and breast
cancer risk among healthy women (RR 1.00, 95% CI 0.94-1.06). However, BRCA1/2
mutation carriers using oral contraceptives showed a heightened risk of breast
cancer (HR 1.39, 95% CI 1.15-1.67).
CONCLUSION: This systematic review highlights the protective effects of modern
contraceptives against ovarian and endometrial cancers while identifying an
increased risk of cervical. No significant breast cancer risk was found for
healthy women, but BRCA1/2 mutation carriers faced increased risks. These
findings underscore the need for personalized contraceptive counselling that
considers cancer risk factors. Further research is needed to explore
contraceptive impacts across different genetic profiles and dosing regimens.
SYSTEMATIC REVIEW REGISTRATION: https://www.crd.york.ac.uk/prospero/, Prospero
BACKGROUND: Approximately one-third of breast cancer (BC) patients show poorer
cognitive function (CF) before receiving adjuvant therapy compared with
age-matched healthy controls. However, the biological mechanisms driving CF
variation in the context of BC remain unclear. In this study, we aimed to
identify genes and biological pathways associated with CF in postmenopausal
women with early-stage hormone receptor-positive (HR+) BC using DNA methylation
(DNAm) data, a dynamic regulator of gene activity.
METHODS: Epigenome-wide association studies (EWAS) and differentially methylated
region analyses were performed for each CF phenotype (seven objective domains
and one subjective phenotype) using DNAm data from whole blood samples (n=109)
taken at time of enrollment. Post-EWAS functional analyses were performed to
enhance the understanding of the CF-related cytosine-phosphate-guanine (CpG)
sites.
RESULTS: When adjusting for age, verbal IQ scores, and global DNAm signature,
cg10331779 near CTNND2 (p-value= 9.65 × 10 -9 ) and cg25906741 in MLIP (p-value=
2.01 × 10 -8 ) were associated with processing speed and subjective CF,
respectively, while regions in/near SLC6A11 , PRKG1/CSTF2T , and FAM3B for
processing speed, and regions in/near PI4KB and SGCE/PEG10 for mental
flexibility were differentially methylated. In addition, beta-estradiol was
identified as a common upstream regulator for all the CF phenotypes, suggesting
an essential role of estrogen in explaining variation in CF of HR+ BC patients.
CONCLUSIONS: In our EWAS of 8 CF phenotypes, we found two epigenome-wide
significant signals, one at cg10331779 near CTNND2 with processing speed and the
other at cg25906741 in MLIP with subjective CF. We also found three
differentially methylated regions associated with processing speed and two
associated with mental flexibility. These findings need replication in larger
cohorts.
BACKGROUND: HLA-G is associated with cancer cell escape. The 3'UTR polymorphism
is involved in the regulation of membrane-bound HLA-G and soluble HLA-G
proteins. The aim of our study was to assess the association of the HLA-G 14-bp
insertion (I)/deletion (D) polymorphism with cancer susceptibility and its
interaction with clinicopathological features and environmental factors.
METHODS: A meta-analysis was performed to investigate the association between
the HLA-G 14-bp I/D polymorphism and different types of cancers according to the
Prisma guidelines.
RESULTS: Thirty-nine publications that studied the 14-bp I/D polymorphism in
cancers met our inclusion criteria. The findings of the meta-analysis showed a
significant association between the 14-bp I/D polymorphism and cancer risk under
the allelic contrast model D vs. I (OR = 1,112, 95 % CI = 1,009-1,227;
P = 0,033) suggesting that the D allele was a risk factor for cancer
susceptibility. Stratification by cancer type demonstrated a significant
association of the 14-bp I/D polymorphism with breast cancer under the D vs. I
contrast allele model (OR = 1,267, 95 % CI = 1,028-1,563; P = 0,027). No
significant association was found for digestive, cervical, haematological and
thyroid cancers. A comparison of groups stratified by ethnicity showed a
significant association for Caucasians under the D vs. I model (OR = 1,147, 95 %
CI = 1,002-1,313; P = 0,047); and for mixed ethnicities under the DD + DI vs. II
(OR = 1,388, 95 % CI = 1,083-1,780; P = 0,010) and DI vs. II (OR = 1,402, 95 %
CI = 1,077-1,824; P = 0,012) models. A comparison of cancer risks associated
with the 14-bp I/D polymorphism according to geographic location revealed
significant risks for the D allele and DD genotype in North Africa, the Middle
East and South America. However, no significant susceptibility to cancer
associated with the 14-bp I/D polymorphism was shown for Europe and North Asia.
The findings of a meta-analysis of subgroups by disease stage showed a
significant association in both early and advanced stages, with the 14-bp
deletion variant being a risk factor. Similarly, a significant cancer risk was
shown for the 14-bp deletion variant in both low- and high-grade cancers.
Finally, the risk associated with the 14-bp I/D polymorphism was higher in
cancers with concomitant viral infection with human papillomavirus (HPV),
hepatitis B virus (HBV) or hepatitis C virus (HCV).
CONCLUSION: The findings of the overall meta-analysis showed a significant
association between the HLA-G 14-bp I/D polymorphism and cancer susceptibility.
The findings stratified analysis and subgroup comparisons showed that the 14-bp
I/D deletion variant was associated with an increased risk of breast cancer. The
HLA-G 14-bp I/D polymorphism may interact with individual and
clinicopathological factors to alter cancer risk. These promising findings for
cancer risk provide the basis for further studies that explore 14bp I/D
polymorphism in cancer screening and immunotherapeutic approach.
BACKGROUND: Collagen type X (ColXα1, encoded by COL10A1) is expressed
specifically in the cartilage-to-bone transition, in bone marrow cells, and in
osteoarthritic (OA) cartilage. We have previously shown that ColXα1 is expressed
in breast tumor stroma, correlates with tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes, and
predicts poor adjuvant therapy outcomes in ER+/HER2+ breast cancer. However, the
underlying molecular mechanisms for these effects are unknown. In this study, we
performed bioinformatic analysis of COL10A1-associated gene modules in breast
and pancreatic cancer as well as in cells from bone marrow and OA cartilage.
These findings provide important insights into the mechanisms of transcriptional
and extracellular matrix changes which impact the local stromal microenvironment
and tumor progression.
METHODS: Immunohistochemistry was performed to examine collagen type X
expression in solid tumors. WGCNA was used to generate COL10A1-associated gene
networks in breast and pancreatic tumor cohorts using RNA-Seq data from The
Cancer Genome Atlas. Computational analysis was employed to assess the impact of
these gene networks on development and progression of cancer and OA. Data
processing and statistical analysis was performed using R and various
publicly-available computational tools.
RESULTS: Expression of COL10A1 and its associated gene networks highlights
inflammatory and immunosuppressive microenvironments, which identify aggressive
breast and pancreatic tumors and contribute to metastatic potential in a
sex-dependent manner. Both cancer types are enriched in stroma, and COL10A1
implicates bone marrow-derived fibroblasts as drivers of the
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in these tumors. Heightened
expression of COL10A1 and its associated gene networks is correlated with poorer
patient outcomes in both breast and pancreatic cancer. Common transcriptional
changes and chondrogenic activity are shared between cancer and OA cartilage,
suggesting that similar microenvironmental alterations may underlie both
diseases.
CONCLUSIONS: COL10A1-associated gene networks may hold substantial value as
regulators and biomarkers of aggressive tumor phenotypes with implications for
therapy development and clinical outcomes. Identification of tumors which
exhibit high expression of COL10A1 and its associated genes may reveal the
presence of bone marrow-derived stromal microenvironments with heightened EMT
capacity and metastatic potential. Our analysis may enable more effective risk
assessment and more precise treatment of patients with breast and pancreatic
cancer.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is a prevalent cancer worldwide, leading many women to
undergo mastectomy and breast reconstruction surgery. Nipple-areolar complex
(NAC) reconstruction is critical in achieving aesthetic and psychological
satisfaction. Recently, three-dimensional (3D) nipple-areola tattooing has
become an alternative for this purpose.
OBJECTIVES: This study evaluates patient-reported outcomes on satisfaction among
Hispanic women who underwent NAC reconstruction using 3D tattooing after breast
reconstruction.
METHODS: Data were collected from a retrospective database in multicentric
academic settings between 2014 and 2024. Participants included Hispanic women
aged 32 to 60 years who received various NAC reconstruction techniques.
Follow-up was conducted no more than six months after surgery, utilizing the
Breast-Q version 2.0 questionnaire to measure satisfaction in two groups Group
1, in which patients received alternative NAC reconstruction methods, and Group
2, which had 3D nipple-areola tattooing.
RESULTS: Patients who underwent 3D nipple-areola tattooing (Group 2)
demonstrated increased psychosocial well-being, with a mean score of 84.73 (±
8.56). Regarding surgeon experience, Group 2 achieved a mean score of 86.21 (±
10.33), which was lower than Group 1 mean of 88.70 (± 10.78). Notably, Group 2
expressed greater satisfaction with nipple reconstruction, with a mean score of
3.73 (± 0.44) compared to Group 1 with a mean of 3.48 (± 0.65).
CONCLUSIONS: The findings indicate that 3D nipple-areola tattooing may enhance
aesthetic outcomes of the NAC and psychosocial well-being in Hispanic women.
This highlights the importance of incorporating unique techniques in breast
reconstruction and the need for a multidisciplinary approach.
BACKGROUND: To assess proportions of metastatic recurrence in women initially
diagnosed with non-metastatic breast cancer by stage at diagnosis, breast cancer
subtype, calendar period and age.
METHODS: A systematic search of MEDLINE and Web of Science databases (January
2010-12 May 2022) was conducted. Studies reporting the proportion of distant
metastatic recurrence in women with non-metastatic breast cancer were identified
and outcomes and characteristics were extracted. Risk of bias was assessed
independently by two reviewers. Random-effects meta-analyses of proportions were
used to calculate pooled estimates and 95% confidence intervals (CIs).
RESULTS: 193 studies covering over 280,000 patients were included in the main
analysis. Pooled proportions of metastatic recurrence increased with longer
median follow-up time from 12.2% (95% CI 10.5-14.0%) at 1-4 years post
diagnosis, 14.3% (95% CI 12.9-15.7%) at 5-9 years to 23.3% (95% CI 20.1-26.8) at
10 years or more. Regional variation was observed with pooled estimates ranging
from 11.0% (95% CI 8.5-13.7%) in Europe to 26.4% (95% CI 16.7-37.4%) in Africa
(1-4 years follow-up). Proportions of recurrence were higher in studies with
diagnosis before 2000 (22.2%, 95% CI 15.1-30.3) compared to studies with
diagnosis from 2000 onwards (12.8%, 95% CI 11.7-14.0). At 1-4 years median
follow-up, pooled proportions of metastatic recurrence were higher in women with
hormone receptor negative (15.2%, 95% CI 12.0-18.7%) compared with receptor
positive disease (9.6%, 95% CI 6.2-13.6%) and in women with locally advanced
(33.2%, 95% CI 24.7-42.3%) relative to early disease at initial diagnosis (4.8%,
95% CI 2.5-7.8%). Proportions were higher in those under 50 years compared with
70+ years, 18.6% (95% CI 15.9-21.4%) versus 13.3% (95% CI 9.2, 18.0%),
respectively. Heterogeneity was high in all meta-analyses and results should be
interpreted with caution.
CONCLUSIONS: Higher proportions of metastatic recurrence in patients initially
diagnosed at an advanced stage and in earlier calendar period emphasises the
importance of early detection and treatment advancements. As the global number
of breast cancer survivors increases, research and health policy efforts should
be directed towards timely diagnosis and access to effective treatments and
care.
BACKGROUND: With the increasing incidence of breast lesions, the differential
diagnosis between benign lesions and breast cancer (BCa) has become a big
challenge. Host peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) could undergo changes
in DNA methylation upon disease progression. However, the clinical value of DNA
methylation of PBMCs in differentiating benign lesions and BCa is still unclear.
METHODS: DNA of PBMCs was isolated and the methylation status of PBMCs in
patients with BCa and benign breast nodules was detected by using Illumina
Infinium methylation EPIC array. The specific methylation targets were validated
by pyrosequencing, Targeted Bisulfite Sequencing Assay, and Multiplex
Methylation PCR Assay(MMPA).
RESULTS: cg26977936, cg23351954, and cg27209741 were validated as differentially
methylated and showed the potential diagnostic values (sensitivity and
specificity were 90.0%/53.3%, 43.3%/90.0%, 90.0%/43.3%, respectively). Moreover,
a diagnostic model was established using these 3 CGs through logistic regression
analysis, and the AUC reached 0.837. Next, this diagnostic model was validated
in another, independent cohort with Targeted Bisulfite Sequencing Assay, and the
clinical value in distinguishing benign and malignant breast disease was also
confirmed (AUC = 0.827, P < 0.05). Finally, to better meet the need for the
clinical test, we further validated the differential diagnostic efficacy of the
2 hypermethylated DMPs by establishing a Multiplex Methylation PCR Assay by
coupling the 5'-flap endonuclease activity of Taq DNA polymerase and molecular
beacon reporters.
CONCLUSIONS: DNA methylation changes in PBMCs showed great potential in
discriminating BCa patients from breast benign lesion patients and may serve as
a novel predictor in clinical applications.
BACKGROUND: Global longitudinal strain (GLS) has been used to identify patients
at risk for cancer-therapy related cardiac dysfunction (CTRCD). However, there
is limited data on the effectiveness of initiating cardioprotective therapy
based on a strain-guided strategy in early stage HER2+ breast cancer patients.
This randomized clinical trial assessed if treatment with carvedilol based on a
strain-guided strategy can prevent development of CTRCD in HER2+ breast cancer
patients on non-anthracycline based regimens.
METHODS: Study participants were prospectively assigned to one of four arms.
Patients with normal LVEF and GLS remained in Arm A. Patients whose GLS
decreased by > 15% from baseline or to < -15% during follow up were randomized
1:1 to prophylactic carvedilol (Arm B) or no therapy (Arm C). Patients who
developed CTRCD were assigned to Arm D. The primary endpoint was GLS stability.
The secondary endpoints were development of CTRCD and rate of anti-HER2
treatment interruption.
RESULTS: Among 110 patients who completed follow up, 84 were assigned to Arm A,
10 each were randomized to Arms B or C, and 6 were assigned to Arm D. At the end
of the study period, there were no significant differences in GLS stability,
development of CTRCD, or number of cancer therapy cycles completed between
patients who did and did not receive cardioprotective therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: In this prospective randomized GLS-guided study of prophylactic
carvedilol in early stage HER2+ breast cancer patients on non-anthracycline
regimens, there were no significant difference between groups in GLS stability,
CTRCD or trastuzumab cycles held. These findings may identify a low-risk group
of patients who may be considered for less intensive cardiac surveillance.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT02993198 . Start date:
4/2015. This trial included patients who were retrospectively registered.
BACKGROUND: There is a strong evidence showing that women who start menstruation
early are at a greater risk of developing breast cancer. Recognizing that women
will seek breast cancer screening when they have a high perceived risk, we
hypothesized that women who experienced early menarche will be more likely to
utilize clinical breast examination (CBE). Hence, we aimed to investigate the
association between age at first menstruation and women's utilization of CBE in
Côte d'Ivoire.
METHODS: We used data from the 2021 Côte d'Ivoire demographic and health survey.
A sample of 14,685 women was used for the analysis. A descriptive analysis, as
well as bivariate and multivariate logistic regression models were computed in
STATA version 18. Adjusted odds ratio (AOR) and a 95% confidence interval was
used to present the result.
RESULTS: CBE utilization was 17.4%. Women who had their first menstruation
before attaining 15 years were significantly less likely to utilize CBE services
[AOR = 0.89; 95% CI 0.81-0.99]. A significantly higher utilization of CBE was
found among those with primary [AOR = 1.48, 95% CI 1.29-1.70], secondary
[AOR = 2.96, 95% CI 2.59-3.38], and higher education [AOR = 4.35, 95% CI
3.50-5.40] compared to those with no formal education. Increasing likelihood of
CBE utilization was observed as age increased. Rural residence was associated
with lower odds of CBE utilization (AOR = 0.84, 95% CI 0.74-0.95]. Increasing
wealth status was associated with higher odds of CBE utilization with those in
the richest households having the highest odds compared to women in the poorest
household [AOR = 2.11, 95% CI 1.69-2.64].
CONCLUSION: Utilization of CBE is low among women of reproductive age in Côte
d'Ivoire. We conclude that even though existing literature has established early
age at first menstruation as a strong risk factor for breast cancer, CBE
utilization is significantly low among those who had early menarche. Going
forward, it is necessary for Côte d'Ivoire's health Ministry to intensify breast
cancer awareness in the country. Such awareness campaigns must emphasize age at
menarche as a risk factor so as to motivate women with a history of early
menstruation to utilize CBE.
BACKGROUND: Cancer is a significant health challenge and the leading cause of
mortality globally. Tumor cells use multiple mechanisms to acquire their
distinctive capacity for uncontrolled proliferation, one of which is the evasion
of apoptosis. It has been shown that in breast, colon, and liver cancer, evasion
of apoptosis is associated with the overexpression of enzymes that metabolize
arachidonic acid (AA) because free AA is a strong inducer of apoptosis.
Glycerol-3-phosphate acyltransferase 2 (GPAT2) is a key enzyme in AA metabolism
and is highly expressed in breast and colon cancer, where it promotes the
development of essential tumor features.
METHODS: In this work, a model of GPAT2 silencing in the human breast
cancer-derived cell line MDA-MB-231 was used, and the cells were exposed to
exogenous AA. The role of GPAT2 in AA-induced cell death was studied using MTT
and TUNEL assays and measurements of caspase activity. The underlying molecular
mechanism of cell death was assessed by qRT‒PCR.
RESULTS: The results showed that AA reduced cell viability only in
GPAT2-silenced cells, and that this cell death was a consequence of an apoptotic
process involving BNIP3 overexpression. Additionally, it was demonstrated that
GPAT2 silencing triggered a compensatory mechanism by overexpressing other genes
involved in AA utilization for eicosanoid biosynthesis.
CONCLUSIONS: We concluded that GPAT2 expression is necessary to prevent
AA-induced apoptotic cell death in MDA-MB-231 cells and that the overexpression
of other AA-metabolizing genes is not sufficient to compensate for the lack of
GPAT2 and prevent apoptosis.
BACKGROUND: Neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) with anthracycline sequential
paclitaxel is the standard regimen for triple negative breast cancer (TNBC),
while TNBC with residual positive axillary lymph node after standard NAC
indicates poor prognosis. There is no evidence that vinorelbine alone can be
used as an adjuvant intensive therapy for such patients at present.
METHODS: We recruited TNBC patients with clinical stage of T1-4/N1-3/M0, who
received NAC with 8 cycles of anthracycline sequential paclitaxel and had
residual tumor in axillary lymph node after surgery. The patients were randomly
divided into adjuvant intensive treatment group (Group A) and control group
(Group B). The patients in group A received vinorelbine at a dose of 25 mg/m2 on
days 1/8 of a 21-day cycle with four planned cycles, while the control group
received no therapy. Stratified according to the Miller-Payne system of the
primary lesion (G1-2/G3-5). The endpoints included distant disease-free survival
(DDFS), recurrence-free survival (RFS), overall survival (OS), and safety.
RESULTS: A total of 22 eligible patients were enrolled in this study, the 3-year
DDFS and RFS rates in the group A were significantly higher than those in group
B (90.0% vs. 42.4%, p = 0.022, both) at a median follow-up of 36 months. All
patients in the group A completed the scheme in full dose, and no grade 3/4
adverse event occurred.
CONCLUSIONS: TNBC patients with residual positive axillary lymph nodes after NAC
of anthracycline sequential paclitaxel could benefit from adjuvant intensive
therapy of vinorelbine with a good safety.
TRAIL REGISTRATION: The study was registered on the Clinical Trial registry
website ( https://register.
CLINICALTRIALS: gov , NCT03270007) (Registration Date: 08/30/2017).
BACKGROUND: Racial differences in invasive breast cancer exist, but less is
known about ductal carcinoma in situ. Our aim was to assess racial/ethnic
differences in ductal carcinoma in situ tumor biology and treatment.
METHODS: Adults with ductal carcinoma in situ were identified from the National
Cancer Database, 2012-2021. Pairwise comparisons were evaluated among
racial/ethnic groups with χ2 or Wilcoxon tests. Multivariable logistic
regression models evaluated outcome predictors for treatment and time to
treatment.
RESULTS: Non-Hispanic Black patients had larger mean tumor size (2.2 cm, P ≤
.001). Non-Hispanic Black and Hispanic patients more frequently presented with
multicentric disease (14.7% and 14.3%, P < .001). Non-Hispanic White patients
had more grade III (45.1%, P < .01) and estrogen receptor-negative disease
(14.2%, P < .04). On multivariable analysis, non-White race/ethnicity patients
were less likely to undergo primary-site surgery (non-Hispanic Black odds ratio,
1.80; Hispanic odds ratio, 1.23; Asian/Pacific Islander odds ratio; 1.45, vs
non-Hispanic White each P ≤ .002), as were uninsured and Medicaid-insured
(uninsured odds ratio, 2.76; Medicaid odds ratio, 1.39; vs private insurance,
both P < .002). Asian patients were more likely to undergo mastectomy (odds
ratio, 1.08; 95% confidence interval, 1.02-1.15, P = .007), along with younger
age (odds ratio, 0.64, P < .001), and multicentricity (hazard ratio, 2.23, P <
.001). For breast conservation, radiation was less frequent among Hispanic
patients (68.8%, P < .001). For estrogen receptor-positive ductal carcinoma in
situ, non-Hispanic Black patients had the greatest receipt of endocrine therapy
(61.9%%, P < .001) and Asian patients the lowest (56.9%, P < .001). On
multivariable analysis, non-White race/ethnicity, uninsured, and Medicaid were
associated with longer times from diagnosis to first surgery and from definitive
surgery to radiation start.
CONCLUSIONS: Racial/ethnic differences exist in ductal carcinoma in situ tumor
biology and treatment, both of which may contribute to poorer outcomes in
disparate groups.
BACKGROUND: Numerous prospective cohort studies have investigated the influence
of dietary patterns on the risks of various cancers, although the findings
differed.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the associations of dietary patterns with risks of
various cancers and assess the strength and validity of the evidence.
METHODS: Relevant articles were retrieved from the PubMed, EMBASE, Web of
Science, and Cochrane library databases from inception to February 22, 2024. The
included systematic reviews were meta-analyses of prospective cohort studies
that reported an effect size to calculate the association between dietary
patterns and cancer risk. The quality of the included studies was evaluated
using a measurement tool to assess systematic reviews and the certainty of
evidence was assessed using credibility assessment of evidence. Outcomes of
interest included any incident cancers. This study was registered with PROSPERO
BACKGROUND: Pathologic response following neoadjuvant immune checkpoint blockade
(ICB) in stage III melanoma serves as a surrogate marker for long-term outcomes.
This may support more personalized, response-directed treatment strategies.
METHODS: The OpACIN-neo and PRADO trials were phase 2 studies evaluating
neoadjuvant treatment with ipilimumab and nivolumab in stage III melanoma. In
OpACIN-neo, all patients underwent therapeutic lymph node dissection (TLND)
without subsequent adjuvant therapy. In contrast, PRADO explored a response-
directed strategy, where patients achieving a major pathologic response (MPR)
omitted TLND and adjuvant therapy, while those without a pathologic response
(pNR) received TLND and adjuvant therapy. Here, we provide a descriptive
post-hoc comparison of 3-year survival outcomes between the non-personalized
approach in OpACIN-neo and the response-directed approach in PRADO.
RESULTS: For patients who achieved an MPR, the 3-year recurrence-free survival
(RFS) was 93 % for those without TLND versus 96 % for those with TLND (log-rank
p = 0.47), and distant metastasis-free survival (DMFS) was 98 % compared to 96 %
(log-rank p = 0.49), respectively. For patients with pNR, 3-year RFS rates were
64 % for those receiving adjuvant systemic therapy and 35 % for patients without
(log-rank p = 0.10). DMFS rates were 70 % versus 52 % (log-rank p = 0.24),
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that TLND and adjuvant therapy may be safely
omitted in most patients achieving an MPR, while adjuvant systemic therapy
following TLND appears to improve RFS and DMFS in patients with pNR. Although
these results are hypothesis-generating and require further validation, they
offer a potential foundation for developing personalized neoadjuvant
immunotherapy approaches.
BACKGROUND: Immediate breast reconstruction (IBR) in locally advanced breast
cancer (LABC) (stage 3A and above) is widely debated, both in terms of delay of
adjuvant therapy and oncological safety. This study aims to systematically
review and evaluate the long-term oncological safety of IBR in patients with
LABC undergoing mastectomy.
METHODS: Search conducted using Medline, Embase, PubMed and Google Scholar
between 1 and 24 December 2023 involving patients with LABC who underwent
mastectomy with or without IBR were included. The meta-analysis included studies
comparing IBR with mastectomy alone in patients with LABC with the primary
outcomes of 5-year overall survival, disease-free survival and local and distant
recurrence rates.
RESULTS: A total of 19,907 patients were included spanning 10 papers. Of these,
89.1% underwent mastectomy alone, while 10.9% underwent IBR (51.2% autologous
and 48.8% implant-based reconstruction). The 5-year overall survival rate was
higher in IBR compared to mastectomy alone (IBR n = 2038/2491 81.8%, vs. Mx only
n = 7468/10,124 73.7%, RR 1.10 [95% CI 1.07-1.12], P < 0.001). No significant
difference found in 5-year disease-free survival (IBR n = 510/689 74.0% vs. Mx
only n = 1339/1924 69.6%, RR 1.06 [95% CI 0.98-1.15], P = 0.17), 5-year local
recurrence groups (IBR n = 52/646 8.0% vs. Mx only n = 122/1708 7.1%, RR 0.80
[95% CI 0.46-1.38], P = 0.42), or 5-year distant recurrence rates (IBR
n = 117/594 19.6% vs. Mx only n = 211/882 23.9%, P = 0.11).
CONCLUSION: IBR in LABC may be associated with improved overall 5-year survival
rates without affecting disease-free survival or recurrence rates. Therefore,
IBR may be a safe option in the treatment of LABC when considering optimal
oncological outcomes.
BACKGROUND: Hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC) is a major type of
hereditary cancer. Establishing effective screening to identify high-risk
individuals for HBOC remains a challenge. We developed a prototype of a chatbot
system that uses artificial intelligence (AI) for preliminary HBOC screening to
determine whether individuals meet the National Comprehensive Cancer Network
BRCA1/2 testing criteria.
OBJECTIVE: This study's objective was to validate the feasibility of this
chatbot in a clinical setting by using it on a patient population that visited a
hospital.
METHODS: We validated the medical accuracy of the chatbot system by performing a
test on patients who consecutively visited the Kanagawa Cancer Center. The
participants completed a preoperation questionnaire to understand their
background, including information technology literacy. After the operation,
qualitative interviews were conducted to collect data on the usability and
acceptability of the system and examine points needing improvement.
RESULTS: A total of 11 participants were enrolled between October and December
2020. All of the participants were women, and among them, 10 (91%) had cancer.
According to the questionnaire, 6 (54%) participants had never heard of a
chatbot, while 7 (64%) had never used one. All participants were able to
complete the chatbot operation, and the average time required for the operation
was 18.0 (SD 5.44) minutes. The determinations by the chatbot of whether the
participants met the BRCA1/2 testing criteria based on their medical and family
history were consistent with those by certified genetic counselors (CGCs). We
compared the medical histories obtained from the participants by the CGCs with
those by the chatbot. Of the 11 participants, 3 (27%) entered information
different from that obtained by the CGCs. These discrepancies were caused by the
participant's omissions or communication errors with the chatbot. Regarding the
family histories, the chatbot provided new information for 3 (27%) of the 11
participants and complemented information for the family members of 5 (45%)
participants not interviewed by the CGCs. The chatbot could not obtain some
information on the family history of 6 (54%) participants due to several
reasons, such as being outside of the scope of the chatbot's interview
questions, the participant's omissions, and communication errors with the
chatbot. Interview data were classified into the following: (1) features, (2)
appearance, (3) usability and preferences, (4) concerns, (5) benefits, and (6)
implementation. Favorable comments on implementation feasibility and comments on
improvements were also obtained.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrated that the preliminary screening system for
HBOC using an AI chatbot was feasible for real patients.
BACKGROUND: Numerous clinical trials have compared the efficacy of endocrine
therapy in post-menopausal breast cancer patients. This study aims to explore
whether there is a difference in recurrence rates between this population using
tamoxifen and aromatase inhibitors (AIs) by analyzing real-world data.
METHODS: This retrospective cohort study utilized the National Health Insurance
(NHI) claims data and the Taiwan Cancer Registry (TCR). We identified 6,050
patients aged over 55 diagnosed with ER-positive, HER2-negative early breast
cancer between 2012 and 2016 (4,451 on AIs alone and 1,599 on tamoxifen alone).
Recurrence in both groups was assessed until the end of 2020. Hazards were
measured based on age of diagnosis, cancer stage, adjuvant chemotherapy,
radiation therapy, type of endocrine therapy used, and adherence.
Recurrence‑free survival between the AIs and tamoxifen groups was evaluated
using the Kaplan-Meier model.
RESULTS: The average age was 65.1 years, with a median follow-up time of 5.7
years and a median duration of endocrine therapy of 4.5 years. The recurrence
rate was 2.2%. Using tamoxifen as endocrine therapy reduces the risk of
recurrence compared to AIs (adjusted HR: 0.32, p < 0.0001). There was no
statistical difference between the two drugs in stage 1 breast cancer. However,
in stage 2, the risk of breast cancer recurrence decreased to 0.15 times with
the use of tamoxifen compared to AIs (p = 0.0002). Stage 2 cancer, histological
grade 3, and non-adherence increased recurrence risk in post-menopausal breast
cancer patients.
CONCLUSION: Based on real-world data analysis, in ER-positive, HER2-negative
post-menopausal women with early breast cancer in Taiwan, the use of tamoxifen
compared to AIs is associated with a lower risk of recurrence. Improved
adherence to medication can break the cycle of recurrence and improve health
outcomes.
BACKGROUND: Health care inequities have partially contributed to the existing
racial gaps in health. Despite having lower incidence rates of breast cancer,
Black women have a 41% higher mortality rate than White women. Black individuals
remain underrepresented in research. Diversity in research is paramount to the
improvement of clinical care practices and subgroup-specific guidelines.
METHODS: Black women from various community venues across geographic regions of
the United States were invited via email, online fliers, social media platforms,
and word of mouth to participate in focus groups. Six online focus groups of six
to 10 Black women aged 25-65 years (N = 38) with and without a history of cancer
were conducted with an in-depth semistructured discussion guide.
RESULTS: Most participants were college educated (32 of 38; 84.2%), aged 50
years or older (31 of 38; 81.6%), and had an annual income of $50,000 or more
(26 of 38; 68.4%). Several barriers to research participation were identified.
They included a lack of empathy and respect in health care settings,
apprehension regarding the sharing of personal information, mistrust of medical
research, and logistical/technical barriers. Alternatively, building individual
and community trust and communicating the value of conducting research
beneficial to the Black community were viewed as facilitators to research
participation.
CONCLUSIONS: Successful engagement of Black women in research requires the
acknowledgment and consideration of the numerous barriers that affect their
ability to participate. Black women are more inclined to participate in research
when the research team is knowledgeable, has experience within their
communities, and engages trusted community partners. Additionally, the research
must be meaningful and impactful to future generations of Black women.
BACKGROUND: In ER + /HER2- early breast cancer (BC), 21-Gene Recurrence Score
(RS) > 25 indicates high-risk of distant-recurrence and predicts benefit from
adjuvant chemotherapy (aCT) regardless of tumor-size. However, T1a/b (≤ 1 cm)
node-negative (N0) tumors, regarded as of low risk of recurrence, were
under-represented in the RS trials. We therefore aimed to investigate the
benefit of aCT in patients with T1a/bN0 BC, RS > 25, where clinical and genomic
risk indicators are discordant.
METHODS: This retrospective observational cohort study utilized Israel's
national Oncotest database to identify Clalit Health Services (CHS) members,
diagnosed with T1a/bN0 HR + /HER2- BC, who underwent RS testing between February
2006, and December 2019. Patients with RS > 25 who received aCT were matched 1:1
by propensity-scoring to similar patients receiving no aCT. Invasive
disease-free survival (iDFS) and distant recurrence were the study endpoints.
Patient demographic and clinical data were obtained from CHS's centralized
database. Kaplan--Meier analysis with log-rank testing was used for comparing
outcomes.
RESULTS: During the study period, high-risk RS result (> 25) was identified in
156/9858 patients of the study cohort. aCT was administered to 74 (47.4%) and
median follow-up was 121 months. Within the 148 matched-cases, eighteen
iDFS-events occurred, nine (12.1%) in each group (χ2 = 0.72, p = 0.39). Four
(5.4%) of the aCT treated and three (4.0%) of the untreated patients were
diagnosed with distant recurrence (χ2 = 0.22, p = 0.64).
CONCLUSIONS: In this study cohort, patients with T1a/bN0 BC, RS > 25 that
received aCT, did not have improved outcomes and the 21-Gene RS > 25 was not
found to be predictive, possibly due to the low number of events observed.
BACKGROUND: Health utility is a key input used to perform cost-utility analysis
(CUA), which is increasingly used to inform resource allocation decisions.
OBJECTIVE: To identify the sources and elicitation methods of health utilities
used in CUAs in oncology.
METHODS: We used the Tufts Cost-Effectiveness Analysis registry to identify
oncology CUAs published in Medline between 1976 and 2021. Eligible CUAs had to
include an oncology population (based on ICD-10 codes), report health utilities,
and be published in English. The references of cited health utilities were
traced to identify the original health utility study and the method of utility
elicitation. Characteristic of included CUAs were summarized and the methods to
derive health utilities were compared.
RESULTS: A total of 1512 CUAs in oncology were identified. The majority of CUAs
(n = 1428, 94.4%) were model-based. Malignant neoplasm of breast and female
genital organs was the most common population considered (n = 424, 28.0%). Among
these CUAs, 8714 health utilities were identified. Upon review, the sources of
2096 (24.1%) health utilities could not be traced. Of the remaining 6618 health
utilities, 1718 (26.0%) were obtained from original health utility study
embedded in CUA in which expert opinion (n = 547, 31.8%) or EQ-5D (n = 479,
27.9%) was most frequently used. The 4900 health utilities (74.0%) that were
cited from external studies were most often derived using the standard gamble
(n = 1258, 25.7%) or EQ-5D (n = 1190, 24.3%).
CONCLUSION: Published health utilities are widely used in oncology CUAs,
especially for model-based analyses. However, the identification, selection, and
use of health utilities is suboptimal.
BACKGROUND: Postmastectomy pain syndrome (PMPS) is a chronic condition that
significantly impacts breast cancer survivors, marked by persistent neuropathic
pain that is often unresponsive to conventional therapies. Spinal cord
stimulation (SCS) has emerged as a promising intervention for managing this type
of pain. This study aimed to assess the clinical efficacy of SCS in managing
PMPS and identify patient-specific factors impacting treatment outcomes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This retrospective observational study analyzed 78 female
patients who underwent SCS implantation between January and October 2023. The
efficacy of SCS was assessed by evaluating changes in visual analog scale (VAS)
pain scores from baseline to six months after implantation. The influence of
factors such as age, body mass index (BMI), prior treatments, and psychologic
health on treatment success was explored using binary logistic regression.
RESULTS: Six months after implantation, 61 patients (78.2%) reported significant
pain relief, with a decrease in VAS scores by ≥4 points. Statistical analysis
revealed several predictors of positive outcomes: younger age (hazard ratio
[HR] = 0.882, 95% CI: 0.802-0.970, p = 0.009), lower BMI (HR = 0.659, 95% CI:
0.487-0.891, p = 0.007), and psychologic treatment (HR = 0.015, 95% CI:
0.001-0.377, p = 0.011). Conversely, prior radiotherapy was associated with less
favorable outcomes (HR = 2.139, 95% CI: 1.219-5.808, p = 0.029). The receiver
operating characteristic curve analysis confirmed the model's accuracy (area
under the curve = 0.927).
CONCLUSIONS: SCS is an effective treatment for PMPS, with age, BMI, psychologic
treatments, and prior radiotherapy being significant predictors of outcomes.
Tailoring treatment plans to these factors can potentially enhance pain
management for patients with PMPS.
BACKGROUND: Investigate incidence and identify predictors of axillary lymph node
metastases in early breast cancer in women >74 years Australia and New Zealand
to inform decision making about sentinel lymph node (SLN) biopsy in this
population.
METHODS: Retrospective review of invasive breast cancer in women in Australia
and New Zealand between 2010 and 2022 using BreastSurgANZ Quality Audit
Database. Data included patient demographics, tumour characteristics, surgery
type, axillary nodal status and adjuvant therapy. Descriptive analysis of
incidence of axillary nodal metastases and use of adjuvant therapy in various
patient and tumour groups was performed, followed by statistical analysis using
multivariate logistic regression to identify predictors of axillary nodal
positivity and correlation between nodal status and prescription of adjuvant
therapy.
RESULTS: Review of 127 436 cases of invasive breast cancer, 17 599 cases
>74 years. Two thirds of the overall population and in those >74 years were node
negative. In patients >74 years with grade 1-2, T1a-b cancers, ER+/HER2- 94%
were node negative. Patient age, tumour size, grade and biomarker profile
correlated with axillary nodal status and analysis of adjuvant therapy revealed
significant correlation between nodal stage and adjuvant radiotherapy,
chemotherapy and endocrine therapy.
CONCLUSION: A total of 94% of patients >74 years with T1a/b, ER positive HER2
negative breast cancer were node negative. Nodal status significantly influences
adjuvant treatment in this patient group and therefore, we recommend clinicians
consider tumour factors and patient fitness in their decision making about SLN
biopsy in the elderly population with hormone receptor positive early breast
cancer.
BACKGROUND: This study emphasizes the critical role of early nutritional
interventions in addressing cancer-related malnutrition. It aimed to assess the
effects of omega-3 fatty acids (ω3) and vitamin D3 (VitD) supplementation on the
nutritional status of newly diagnosed women with breast cancer (BC) in the Gaza
Strip, Palestine.
METHOD: A total of 88 newly diagnosed women with BC were randomly assigned into
four groups: (i) Omega-3 fatty acid (ω3) group; (ii) Vitamin D (VitD) group;
(iii) ω3+VitD group; and (iv) the controls. The patients took two daily 300 mg
ω3 capsules and/or one weekly 50,000 IU VitD tablet for nine weeks. Nutritional
status of the participants was assessed by several measurement tools, namely,
the Patient-Generated Subjective Global Assessment (PG-SGA)-derived scores,
anthropometric measurements, blood albumin status and dietary intakes between
the baseline and after 9 weeks post-intervention. The procedures of the present
study were registered on ClinicalTrial.gov with the identifier NCT05331807.
RESULTS: At the end of trial, there was a significant increase in the
PG-SGA-derived nutritional risk scores (p < 0.01), body weight and body mass
index (BMI) (both p < 0.05) among participants in ω3+VitD group compared to
other groups. Additionally, there was a significant rise in blood albumin levels
(p < 0.05), daily energy and protein intake in the ω3+VitD group (p < 0.05)
compared to baseline.
CONCLUSION: Participants with supplementation of daily ω3 and weekly VitD had
improved nutritional status, assessed by the PG-SGA scores and anthropometric
measures, blood albumin and dietary energy and protein intake among women with
BC who were undergoing active treatment.
BACKGROUND: The early exposure of nutrients during pubertal mammary gland
development may reduce the risk of developing breast cancer later in life.
Anticancer n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (n-3 PUFA) are shown to modulate
pubertal mammary gland development; however, the mechanisms of action remain
unclear. Prior work focused on effects at the whole tissue level, and little is
known at the cellular level, such as at the level of mammary epithelial cells
(MECs), which are implicated in cancer development.
METHODS: This pilot study examined the effects of lifelong n-3 PUFA exposure on
the transcriptome by RNA-Seq in the isolated MECs of pubertal (6-8-week-old)
female fat-1 transgenic mice capable of de novo n-3 PUFA synthesis. edgeR and
DESeq2 were used separately for the differential expression analysis of RNA
sequencing data followed by the Benjamani-Hochberg procedure for multiple
testing correction.
RESULTS: Nine genes were found concordant and significantly different (p ≤ 0.05)
by both the DESeq2 and edgeR methods. These genes were associated with multiple
pathways, suggesting that n-3 PUFA stimulates estrogen-related signaling
(Mlltl0, Galr3, and Nrip1) and a glycolytic profile (Soga1, Pdpr, and Uso1)
while offering protective effects for immune and DNA damage responses (Glpd1,
Garre1, and Rpa1) in MECs during puberty.
CONCLUSIONS: This pilot study highlights the utility of RNA-Seq to better
understanding the mechanistic effects of specific nutrients such as n-3 PUFA in
a cell-specific manner. Thus, further studies are warranted to investigate the
cell-specific mechanisms by which n-3 PUFA influences pubertal mammary gland
development and breast cancer risk later in life.
BACKGROUND: Since the discovery that Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDCAi)
could enhance radiation response, a number of HDACi, mainly pan-HDAC inhibitors,
have been studied either as monotherapy or in combination with X-ray irradiation
or chemotherapeutic drugs in the management of breast cancer. However, studies
on the combination of HDACi and proton radiation remain limited. CUDC-101 is a
multitarget inhibitor of Histone deacetylases (HDACs), epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR), and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER-2). In this
paper, the effectiveness of CUDC-101 in enhancing radiation response to both
proton and X-ray irradiation was studied.
METHODS: MCF-7, MDA-MB-231, and MCF-10A cell lines were pre-treated with
CUDC-101 and exposed to 148 MeV protons, and X-rays were used as reference
radiation. Colony survival, γ-H2AX foci, apoptosis, and cell cycle analysis
assays were performed.
RESULTS: γ-H2AX foci assays showed increased sensitivity to CUDC-101 in the
MDA-MB-231 cell line compared to the MCF-7 cell line. In both cell lines,
induction of apoptosis was enhanced in CUDC-101 pre-treated cells compared to
radiation (protons or X-rays) alone. Increased apoptosis was also noted in
CUDC-101 pre-treated cells in the MCF-10A cell line. Cell cycle analysis showed
increased G2/M arrest by CUDC-101 mono-treatment as well as combination of
CUDC-101 and X-ray irradiation in the MDA-MB-231 cell line.
CONCLUSIONS: CUDC-101 effectively enhances response to both proton and X-ray
irradiation, in the triple-negative MDA-MB-231 cell line. This enhancement was
most notable when CUDC-101 was combined with proton irradiation. This study
highlights that CUDC-101 holds potential in the management of triple-negative
breast cancer as monotherapy or in combination with protons or X-ray
irradiation.
BACKGROUND: In the one-stop breast clinic setting, breast cytology traditionally
provides immediate diagnosis of carcinoma. Fluorescence confocal microscopy
(FCM) is an emerging optical technique enabling ex vivo analysis of breast
biopsies in real-time. This study represents the first proof of concept for
integrating FCM imaging into the routine workflow of breast core needle biopsies
(CNB) at Gustave Roussy's one-stop breast clinic.
METHODS: Fifty women with breast masses underwent consecutive enrollment.
Biopsies were stained with acridine orange and fast green, followed by imaging
using the Vivascope 2500M-G4 (FCM). Interpretation was conducted by two
pathologists in real time (PT1) or postoperatively (PT2). Concordance with
definitive histology, the duration of the FCM protocol, and its impact on
conventional histopathology, immunohistochemistry, and FISH analyses were
evaluated.
RESULTS: In our study of 50 biopsies, a concordant diagnosis of malignancy was
performed using FCM on the malignant cases at definitive histology in 93.5%
(29/31 cases) and in 90.3% (28/31 cases) according to PT1 and PT2, respectively.
When the FCM suspicious cases were added, FCM identified 100% (31/31 cases) and
96.7% (30/31 cases) of the malignant cases according to PT1 and PT2,
respectively. A notable false positive case was identified as a complex
sclerosing lesion. The median time for sample preparation (including tissue
reception) was 5 min, while the median time for imaging acquisition with
interpretation was 3 min for PT1, but 1 min required for interpretation alone by
PT2. Histopathological alterations were not more prevalent in FCM-imaged
biopsies compared to conventionally treated biopsies. The immunophenotyping and
molecular assessment of tissue were preserved after FCM protocol.
CONCLUSIONS: FCM shows promise as a new histological method for the immediate
diagnosis of breast carcinoma on core needle biopsies in a one-stop clinic
setting, while also preserving tissue specimens for final histology.
BACKGROUND: Ki-67's response to pre-operative endocrine therapy (ET) in early
breast cancer is an evidence-based tool to guide adjuvant treatment decisions.
Physicians across Canada were surveyed to explore current practice patterns and
perceived barriers to the use of Ki-67 in practice.
METHODS: Physicians were invited to participate in an anonymous survey and were
eligible if they prescribed systemic therapy for breast cancer in Canada.
Respondents were asked to describe their usage of Ki-67, perceptions of the
evidence surrounding Ki-67 ET response, and interest in future trials using this
approach.
RESULTS: The survey received 48/163 responses (29.4%). The majority of
respondents (97.6%) reported access to Ki-67 testing upon request. Treatment
decisions for adjuvant Abemaciclib was the most common reason (97.6%), followed
by adjuvant chemotherapy decisions (16.7%). Only 19.0% had used Ki-67's response
to pre-operative ET in practice. Common barriers to this approach that were
identified included a lack of awareness from other providers (54.8%), an
increased resource requirement (54.8%), and a lack of timely medical oncology
consultation (52.4%). The majority of physicians (85.3%) reported that they
would participate in future trials using the Ki-67 endocrine response, and that
rate of treatment decision change (95.2%) and cost analysis (42.3%) were
important endpoints.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite the widespread availability of Ki-67 testing, few
physicians in Canada currently use it to assess endocrine response,
predominantly due to logistical and resource constraints. There is a high level
of interest in participating in future trials using this strategy, which should
focus on disease related outcomes, feasibility, and the financial impact on the
public healthcare system.
BACKGROUND: Proanthocyanidins (PACs) from black soybean seed coat have
antioxidant and anti-tumorigenic properties. We investigated the anti-tumor
properties and mechanisms of action of PACs on colorectal cancer (CRC).
METHODS: We fed the APCmin/+ mice, which are highly susceptible to spontaneous
intestinal adenoma formation, diets supplemented with or without PACs for 7
weeks and assessed adverse effects, the number and size of intestinal polyps,
and the expression of pro- and anti-proliferative proteins in the intestine. The
mouse gut microbiome composition was analyzed, and the concentrations of gut
short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) were quantified. We also compared CRC incidence
in Tamba in Japan, where black soybean is consumed frequently, with that in the
rest of Japan.
RESULTS: The number and size of intestinal polyps notably decreased in the
PAC-fed mice. Compared with control mice, the PAC-fed mice showed lower
expression of proliferation markers proliferating cell nuclear antigen and β
catenin and a higher expression of the anti-inflammatory protein oligomeric
mucus gel-forming. PAC supplementation increased the prevalence and
concentrations of beneficial gut microbes and SCFAs, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Diet supplemented with black soybean-derived PACs could prevent CRC
development in mice through gut microbiome remodeling. Regions consuming black
soybeans have low CRC incidence. Notably, the incidence of CRC, breast cancer,
and liver cancer was significantly lower in Tamba than in the rest of Hyogo
Prefecture or Japan. Future studies should delineate the mechanisms underlying
the CRC-protective effects of PACs. Nevertheless, our results demonstrate the
potential of including PACs in dietary recommendations for cancer prevention.
BACKGROUND: The etiology of most mesenchymal tumors is unknown, and knowledge
about syndromes with an increased risk of tumors in bone or soft tissue is
sparse.
METHODS: We present a prospective germline analysis of 312 patients with tumors
suspected of being sarcomas at a tertiary sarcoma center. Germline and tumor
whole genome sequencing, tumor transcriptome, and methylome analyses were
performed.
RESULTS: Germline pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants associated with an
increased risk of tumors were detected in 24 patients (8%), of which 11 (4%)
harbored a detectable second hit in the tumor. Second hits were confirmed in
genes with (NF1, RB1, TP53, EXT2, and SDHC) and without (ATM, CDC73, MLH1, MSH6,
POLG, and KCNQ1) known association with mesenchymal tumor predisposition.
Sarcomas from two Lynch syndrome patients showed mismatch repair deficiency,
predicting a treatment response to immune checkpoint inhibitors (Level 1
biomarker according to the FDA (Federal Drug Administration) and ESMO (European
Society for Medical Oncology)). None of the three CHEK2 carriers had a second
hit in the tumor, suggesting a weak link to sarcoma.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that second-hit analyses can be used in standard of
care to identify syndrome-related tumors. This approach can help distinguish
true manifestations of tumor syndromes from unrelated germline findings and
enhance the understanding of germline predisposition in soft tissue tumors.
Prospective screening using germline whole genome sequencing should be
considered when comprehensive somatic sequencing is introduced into clinical
practice.
BACKGROUND: Assembly factor for spindle microtubules (ASPM) has gained
significant attention in cancer research due to its association with tumor
growth and progression. Through the analysis of large-scale genomic datasets,
ASPM has been identified as the top upregulated gene in breast cancer (BC),
characterized by high proliferation. This multicohort study aimed to investigate
the clinicopathological and prognostic significance of ASPM mRNA and protein
expression in BC.
METHODS: ASPM mRNA expression was assessed using the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)
BC cohort and has been further validated in the Molecular Taxonomy of BC
International Consortium (METABRIC) (n = 1980), The Uppsala cohort (n = 249), in
addition to the combined multicentric cohort (n = 7252). ASPM protein expression
was evaluated in a large BC cohort (n = 1300) using immunohistochemistry. The
correlations between ASPM expression, clinicopathological parameters, molecular
subtypes and outcome were assessed. The response to taxane treatment was
compared to the clinical prognosis of ASPM using the ROC plotter.
RESULTS: High ASPM mRNA and protein expression were significantly associated
with aggressive BC features and poor survival across all cohorts. The
association with poor outcomes was maintained in the adjuvant chemotherapy and
radio-therapy-treated patients. Responders to taxane treatment showed
significantly elevated ASPM levels compared to non-responders.
CONCLUSIONS: High ASPM expression predicts poor prognosis in BC. It may play a
role in treatment resistance within a specific subgroup of patients. Further
clinical trials are warranted to explore the potential of ASPM as a target for
therapeutic interventions in cancer.
BACKGROUND: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is associated with a
significant percentage of germline pathogenic variants (GPVs). Unlike in the
United States, routine universal genetic testing is not performed in Europe. The
aim of the study is to evaluate the diagnostic yield of germline genetic testing
in all patients with PDAC.
METHODS: Individuals with newly diagnosed PDAC from three Spanish hospitals were
enrolled, regardless of family history. Thirteen known susceptibility genes for
PDAC were studied using a multigene panel or whole-exome sequencing.
RESULTS: One hundred seventy-nine PDAC patients underwent genetic testing.
Fourteen (7.8%) had a GPV or likely pathogenic variant In the genes studied: six
in ATM, six in BRCA2, one in PALB2, and one in TP53. Of these, seven (50%) did
not meet the clinical criteria for genetic study and would have been classified
as sporadic PDAC. Presenting with a personal history of any other neoplasm was
associated with some GPV, with an odds ratio (OR) of 3.5 (1.1-11.5). A family
history of PDAC and breast cancer was also associated with some GPV, with oRs of
3.7 (1.08-13.6) and 8.5 (2.6-26.6), respectively. None of the patients over 60
years without a relevant family history of malignancies presented a GPV
associated with PDAC.
CONCLUSIONS: In our PDAC cohort, a noteworthy number of GPVs were identified,
and half of these patients would have been classified as sporadic based solely
on clinical criteria. Genetic testing should always be considered, particularly
in patients under 60 years or those with a history of other malignancies,
especially where economic resources need optimization.
BACKGROUND: Adjuvant trastuzumab is the standard of care for HER2+ breast cancer
(BC) patients. However, >50% of patients become resistant. This study aimed at
the identification of the molecular factors associated with disease relapse and
their further investigation as therapeutically exploitable targets.
METHODS: Analyses were conducted on formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues of
the primary tumors of relapsed (cases) and not relapsed (controls) HER2+ BC
patients treated with adjuvant trastuzumab. The nCounter Human Breast Cancer
Panel 360 was used. Logistic regression and partitioning around medoids were
employed to identify the genes associated with disease recurrence. Cytotoxicity
experiments using trastuzumab-resistant cell lines and a network pharmacology
approach were carried out to investigate drug efficacy.
RESULTS: A total of 52 patients (26 relapsed and 26 not relapsed) were analyzed.
We found that a higher expression of HDAC6 was significantly associated with an
increased risk of recurrence, with an adjusted OR of 3.20 (95% CI 1.38-9.91, p =
0.016). Then, we investigated the cytotoxic activity of the selective HDAC6
inhibitor Nexturastat A (NextA) on HER2+ cell lines, which were both sensitive
and trastuzumab-resistant. A sub-cytotoxic concentration of NextA, combined with
trastuzumab, showed a synergistic effect on BC cell lines. Finally, using a
network pharmacology approach, we identified HSP90AA1 as the putative molecular
candidate responsible for the synergism observed in vitro.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings encourage the exploration of the role of HDAC6 as a
prognostic factor and the combinatorial use of HDAC6 selective inhibitors
combined with trastuzumab in HER2+ BC, in particular for those patients
experiencing drug resistance.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer represents the most common type of malignant neoplasm
worldwide. Advances in diagnosis and treatment have increased the life
expectancy of patients. However, the sequelae associated with the treatment of
the disease such as chronic pain, kinesiophobia and loss of physical function in
breast cancer survivors (BCS) are a long-term health problem. Therapeutic
strategies are required for the treatment of chronic sequelae in this
population.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the effectiveness of a pain neuroscience education (PNE)
and therapeutic exercise (TE) for the treatment of chronic sequelae in BCS.
METHODS: Quasi-experimental repeated measures study. The intervention lasted 9
weeks, with 3 educational and 24 exercise sessions. Pain frequency and intensity
(VAS scale), neuropathic pain (DN4), kinesiophobia level (TSK-11V), central
sensitization (CSI-Sp), functionality of the affected arm (ULFI-Sp) and active
joint range (ROM) with goniometry were measured at baseline, 3rd, 6th and 9th
week. Statistical analysis included Friedman's test and ANOVA according to
normality criteria.
RESULTS: A total sample of 26 BCS participate in the study. Significant
statistical changes were found from the 3rd week of treatment in the frequency
and intensity of pain, kinesiophobia and neuropathic pain (p < 0.05). All
variables had significant changes at the 9th week (p = 0.001).
CONCLUSION: The results of the present investigation suggest that the
combination of PNE and TE are effective in treating sequelae at short term in
BCS with chronic pain.
BACKGROUND: Trastuzumab, a monoclonal antibody for breast cancer, faces global
accessibility challenges, primarily due to high costs. This study examines how
changes in medical insurance policies and price adjustments influence
Trastuzumab utilization in China, focusing on implementation challenges and
their impact on drug accessibility and affordability.
METHODS: This retrospective study investigated Trastuzumab utilization among
HER2-positive breast cancer patients at a tertiary hospital from May 2013 to
December 2022 in JX, a prefecture-level city in eastern China. Patients were
stratified based on their CerbB2 indicator, because those with a 2 + CerbB2
status require further FISH testing to confirm Trastuzumab eligibility. We
analyzed the utilization rates of both FISH test and Trastuzumab using logistic
regressions, identifying factors that influence their usage.
RESULTS: 766 patients were included. The utilization rate of Trastuzumab among
patients with CerbB2 3+ rose from 40.40 to 77.94% in September 2017 following
the expansion of insurance coverage, and further increased to 90.41% after a
price reduction in 2020. The FISH test was not covered by health insurance, and
it was not available in the local hospital until Trastuzumab became available in
JX city. For patients with CerbB2 2+, the proportion undergoing the FISH test
increased dramatically from 8.89 to 82.08% after the price reduction in 2020.
The mere inclusion into basic medical insurance, regardless of insurance types,
significantly increased the utilization of Trastuzumab and the FISH test.
However, rural patients in JX city are still facing financial burdens with
Trastuzumab's out-of-pocket cost accounting for 62.9% of their annual disposable
income in 2020.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that insurance coverage and price reduction
significantly increased Trastuzumab utilization. However, failure to improve the
accessibility of the FISH test can pose challenges in enhancing the uptake of
Trastuzumab among eligible patients. With the expiration of Trastuzumab's patent
and the development of affordable biosimilars, there are now greater
opportunities to enhance treatment access globally. These insights can inform
policy makers of implementation guidance about providing financial support for
breast cancer patients in other LMICs.
BACKGROUND: Tissue stiffness, dictated by organisation of interstitial fibrillar
collagens, increases breast cancer risk and contributes to cancer progression.
Tamoxifen is a standard treatment for receptor-positive breast cancer and is
also aproved for primary prevention. We investigated the effect of tamoxifen and
its main metabolites on the breast tissue collagen organisation as a proxy for
stiffness and explored the relationship between mammographic density (MD) and
collagen organisation.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: This sub-study of the double-blinded dose-determination
trial, KARISMA, included 83 healthy women randomised to 6 months of 20, 10, 5,
2.5, and 1 mg of tamoxifen or placebo. Ultrasound-guided core-needle breast
biopsies collected before and after treatment were evaluated for collagen
organisation by polarised light microscopy.
RESULTS: Tamoxifen reduced the amount of organised collagen and overall
organisation, reflected by a shift from heavily crosslinked thick fibres to
thinner, less crosslinked fibres. Collagen remodelling correlated with plasma
concentrations of tamoxifen metabolites. MD change was not associated with
changes in amount of organised collagen but was correlated with less
crosslinking in premenopausal women.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study of healthy women, tamoxifen decreased the overall
organisation of fibrillar collagens, and consequently, the breast tissue
stiffness. These stromal alterations may play a role in the well-established
preventive and therapeutic effects of tamoxifen. Trial registration
ClinicalTrials.gov ID: NCT03346200. Registered November 1st, 2017.
Retrospectively registered.
BACKGROUND: The timing of a breast cancer (BC) diagnosis has a significant
psychological impact on patients. However, it reported that those eligible for
treatment regimens based on neoadjuvant chemotherapy may experience high levels
of depression, anxiety and distress. To cope with this situation, patients
deploy psychological coping strategies. The aim of this study is to explore
effective and ineffective psychological adjustment mobilized by Moroccan
patients newly diagnosed with BC and before receiving neoadjuvant chemotherapy,
as well as to identify their associations to socio-demographic and clinical
determinants.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 209 patients were recruited in outpatient in
oncology department in the public oncology hospital of Fez city, between 2021
and 2023. Ethics approval was obtained for this study and patients has signed an
informed consent form. The questionnaire interview included socio-economic and
clinical variables and the Arabic version of Mini-Mental Adjustment to Cancer
(Mini-MAC) scale, which measures the strategies of mental adjustment to disease,
as fighting spirit (FS), hopelessness/helplessness (HH), anxious preoccupations
(AP), cognitive avoidance (CA), fatalism (FA), "maladaptive coping" and
"adaptive coping". Bivariate analysis of psychological adjustment strategies and
sociodemographic and clinical variables was carried out using statistical tests
according to the nature of the variables, to their normality and the homogeneity
of their variances. Univariate and multivariate linear regression modelling was
carried out using a forward "enter" regression procedure.
RESULTS: A mean age of 47.43 ± 9.45 was found among participants. Assessment of
mental adjustment to cancer using Mini-MAC scores revealed that psychological
adjustment strategies with a higher mean score were FA, FS and "adaptive coping"
strategies. Based mainly on multiple linear Regression, monthly family income
was negatively associated with HH, and FS and positively linked to FA and
"adaptive coping" strategies. Moreover, the left side as BC laterality was
negatively associated with AP and "maladaptive coping" strategies. Furthermore,
positive ER status was negatively associated with HH and "maladaptive coping"
strategies and high Ki-67 levels were positively linked to AP.
CONCLUSION: Programs to strengthen psychological adjustment in patients with BC
candidates for NACT, taking into consideration the determinants found associated
in this study, are of great importance since the first oncology consultation.
BACKGROUND: Patients with Triple Negative Breast Cancer (TNBC) currently lack
targeted therapies, and consequently face higher mortality rates when compared
to patients with other breast cancer subtypes. The tumor microenvironment (TME)
cytokine Oncostatin M (OSM) reprograms TNBC cells to a more
stem-like/mesenchymal state, conferring aggressive cancer cell properties such
as enhanced migration and invasion, increased tumor-initiating capacity, and
intrinsic resistance to the current standards of care. In contrast to OSM,
Interferon-β (IFN-β) promotes a more differentiated, epithelial cell phenotype
in addition to its role as an activator of anti-tumor immunity. Importantly, OSM
suppresses the production of IFN-β, although the mechanism of IFN-β suppression
has not yet been elucidated.
METHODS: IFN-β production and downstream autocrine signaling were assessed via
quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) and Western blotting in TNBC cells
following exposure to OSM. RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) was used to assess an IFN-β
metagene signature, and to assess the expression of innate immune sensors, which
are upstream activators of IFN-β. Cell migration was assessed using an in vitro
chemotaxis assay. Additionally, TNBC cells were exposed to TGF-β1, Snail, and
Zeb1, and IFN-β production and downstream autocrine signaling were assessed via
RNA-seq, qRT-PCR, and Western blotting.
RESULTS: Here, we identify the repression of Toll-like Receptor 3 (TLR3), an
innate immune sensor, as the key molecular event linking OSM signaling and the
repression of IFN-β transcription, production, and autocrine IFN signaling.
Moreover, we demonstrate that additional epithelial-mesenchymal
transition-inducing factors, such as TGF-β1, Snail, and Zeb1, similarly suppress
TLR3-mediated IFN-β production and signaling.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings provide a novel insight into the regulation of TLR3
and IFN-β production in TNBC cells, which are known indicators of treatment
responses to DNA-damaging therapies. Furthermore, strategies to stimulate TLR3
in order to increase IFN-β within the TME may be ineffective in
stem-like/mesenchymal cells, as TLR3 is strongly repressed. Rather, we propose
that therapies targeting OSM or OSM receptor would reverse the
stem-like/mesenchymal program and restore TLR3-mediated IFN-β production within
the TME, facilitating improved responses to current therapies.
BACKGROUND: Elevated mammographic density is associated with increased breast
cancer risk. However, the contribution of longitudinal changes in mammographic
density to breast cancer risk beyond initial mammographic density levels,
considering familial breast cancer risk and menopausal status, remains uncertain
but holds important clinical implications.
METHODS: In a nested case-control study within the Sister Study (323 cases, 899
controls; 12,095 mammograms), a cohort enriched for family history of breast
cancer, we examined case-control status in relation to the largest annual change
in percent density and dense area using mammograms available spanning 5.4 years,
on average, using multivariable logistic regression and to the rate of
mammographic density change using linear mixed-effects models. We considered
effect modification by: mammographic density level of the earlier mammogram, the
extent of family history, Breast and Ovarian Analysis of Disease Incidence and
Carrier Estimation (BOADICEA) risk strata, and menopausal status.
RESULTS: Cases (diagnosed < 60 years) had greater initial percent density and
dense area levels and a slower rate of decline in dense area than controls.
Women with stable mammographic density (≤ 10% annual change) had an increased
breast cancer risk as compared with women whose largest mammographic density
change was > 10% annual decline (e.g., Odds Ratio (OR) 2.34, 95% Confidence
Interval (CI) 1.63-3.37 for dense area). Increasing vs. decreasing dense area
was also associated with elevated risk, especially in women with the highest
dense area levels at the earlier mammogram (OR: 2.56, 95%CI 1.50-4.36). Although
generally similar across menopausal and familial risk categories, the
associations of MD change with risk appeared stronger in pre-menopausal and
lower-risk women.
CONCLUSIONS: Women who maintain higher levels of mammographic density (i.e. do
not decrease over time) or have increasing mammographic density over time have a
higher risk of subsequent breast cancer than women with high mammographic
density that decreases over time. These findings suggest potential for
incorporating mammographic density trajectories in clinical risk assessment, and
the importance of additional breast cancer monitoring in women not experiencing
declines in mammographic density over time.
BACKGROUND: Prolactin, a hormone produced by the pituitary gland, regulates
breast development and may contribute to breast cancer etiology. However, most
epidemiologic studies of prolactin and breast cancer have been restricted to
single, often small, study samples with limited exploration of effect
modification.
METHODS: The Biomarkers in Breast Cancer Risk Prediction consortium includes
8,279 postmenopausal women sampled from four prospective cohort studies, of whom
3,441 were diagnosed with invasive breast cancer after enrollment. Prolactin
concentrations were measured for all study participants on plasma samples
collected when all women were postmenopausal and before any breast cancer
diagnosis using ELISA assays. Pooled, unconditional logistic regression models,
adjusted for confounders, estimated odd ratios (OR) for associations of
prolactin and postmenopausal breast cancer risk overall and stratified by breast
cancer risk factors.
RESULTS: Higher plasma prolactin concentrations were positively associated with
postmenopausal breast cancer risk (> 13.2 ng/mL vs. < 7.9 ng/mL, OR: 1.20, 95%
CI: 1.06, 1.36; P-trend < 0.001). Although associations did not appear to vary
by time since blood draw or most breast cancer risk factors, associations were
primarily observed in current users of postmenopausal hormones at blood draw
(> 13.2 ng/mL vs. < 7.9 ng/mL, current users, OR: 1.58, 95% CI: 1.27, 1.96,
P-trend < 0.001; non-current users, OR: 1.08, 95% CI: 0.93, 1.27,
P-trend = 0.11; P-heterogeneity = 0.06).
CONCLUSION: Prolactin may be a risk factor for postmenopausal breast cancer,
particularly in the context of postmenopausal hormone use. Investigations of
prolactin interactions with other hormonal factors may further inform breast
cancer etiology.
BACKGROUND: Presently incurable, metastatic breast cancer is estimated to occur
in as many as 30% of those diagnosed with early-stage breast cancer. Timely and
accurate identification of those at risk for developing metastasis using
validated biomarkers has the potential to have profound impact on overall
survival rates. Our primary goal was to conduct a systematic review and
synthesize the existing body of scientific knowledge on the candidate genes and
their respective single nucleotide polymorphisms associated with
metastasis-related outcomes among patients diagnosed with breast cancer. This
knowledge is critical to inform future hypothesis-driven and validation research
aimed at enhancing clinical decision-making for breast cancer patients.
METHODS: Using PRISMA guidelines, literature searches were conducted on
September 13th, 2023, using PubMed and Embase databases. The systematic review
protocol was registered with INPLASY (DOI:
https://doi.org/10.37766/inplasy2024.8.0014 ). Covidence software was used to
facilitate the screening and article extraction processes. Peer-reviewed
articles were selected if authors reported on single nucleotide polymorphisms
directly associated with metastasis among adults diagnosed with breast cancer.
FINDINGS: We identified 451 articles after 44 duplicates were removed resulting
in 407 articles to be screened for study inclusion. Three reviewers completed
the article screening process which resulted in 86 articles meeting the study
inclusion criteria. Sampling varied across studies with the majority utilizing a
case-control design (n = 75, 87.2%), with sample sizes ranging from 23 to 1,017
participants having mean age 50.65 ± 4.50 (min-max: 20-75). The synthesis of
this internationally generated evidence revealed that the scientific area on the
underlying biological contributions to breast cancer metastasis remains
predominantly exploratory in nature (n = 74, 86%). Of the 12 studies with
reported power analyses, only 9 explicitly stated the power values which ranged
from 47.88 to 99%.
DISCUSSION: Understanding the underlying biological mechanisms contributing to
metastasis is a critical component for precision oncological therapeutics and
treatment approaches. Current evidence investigating the contribution of SNPs to
the development of metastasis is characterized by underpowered candidate gene
studies. To inform individualized precision health practices and improve breast
cancer survival outcomes, future hypothesis-driven research is needed to
replicate these associations in larger, more diverse datasets.
BACKGROUND: Metaplastic breast carcinoma (MpBC) is a rare histological subtype
of breast cancer, and its prognosis is relatively poor. The survival trend of
MpBC with different hormone receptor statuses has remained unclear over the past
two decades.
METHODS: MpBC patient data were collected from the Surveillance, Epidemiology,
and End Results database from 2000 to 2019. Patients were divided into two
groups according to their hormone receptor status (negative and positive). The
survival probabilities were calculated via Kaplan‒Meier curves. Logistic
regression analysis was used to obtain odds ratios for treatment and demographic
characteristics. Multivariate Cox regression was used to identify prognostic
factors.
RESULTS: A total of 3,076 patients were enrolled, and a significant improvement
in survival was observed over the last 10 years. For HR-negative MpBC patients,
both overall survival and breast cancer-specific survival improved, whereas no
survival improvement was observed for HR-positive patients. Compared with those
in the time period from 2000 to 2009, the proportion of negative nodes and the
likelihood of receiving chemotherapy increased for HR-negative patients from
2010 to 2019. In the HR-negative subgroup, the survival of Whites improved
significantly, whereas the survival of Blacks improved in the HR-positive
subgroup.
CONCLUSIONS: The survival of HR-negative MpBC patients has improved
significantly in the past 20 years, which may be related to early diagnosis,
increased adjuvant therapy and medical development, but no trend towards
improvement has been observed in HR-positive patients. Racial disparities in
different HR statuses also need to be addressed.
BACKGROUND: Today the prerequisites exist to initiate risk-stratified screening
according to a woman's individual risk of breast cancer as opposed to existing
one-size-fits-all age-based programmes. This presupposes that the women accept
having their personal risk score estimated and their screening intervals changed
accordingly. Risk-stratified screening has not yet been implemented in any
country, but in the future many European countries will very likely move towards
more personalized screening.
METHODS: This qualitative study among 46 women aged 50-69 years used an
anthropological approach and interpretive description. Data was collected using
semi-structured focus group interviews and telephone interviews. The interviews
were analysed using systematic text condensation.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to explore Danish women's understanding of
breast cancer risk and their attitudes towards the concept of risk-stratified
breast cancer screening.
RESULTS: The women highly valued the current screening program, seeing regular
mammograms as crucial for early detection. The women had good knowledge of the
causes of breast cancer, but they had not given much thought to their own risk.
They found a personalized screening approach more reliable than age-based
screening, understanding that low risk is not the same as no risk just as high
risk is not equal to ever developing breast cancer. Despite concerns about
increased anxiety arising from knowing one's risk, they appreciated the
possibility of more frequent screenings for high-risk individuals.
CONCLUSION: In general, the women showed acceptance of a new breast cancer
screening concept estimating their personal risk score. Due to concerns about
interval cancers and the prolonged screening intervals for women at low risk,
offering more intensified screening for high-risk women may be less challenging
than deescalating screening for low-risk women. Whether the expressed positive
attitude and curious interest will translate into actual participation if
implemented, remains to be investigated further in an ongoing Danish trial.
BACKGROUND: Breastmilk is widely regarded as the healthiest choice for both
infants and mothers due to its numerous advantages over formula, such as higher
concentrations of essential nutrients and antibodies, easier digestion, and
superior taste. The World Health Organization International Code of Marketing of
Breast-milk Substitutes was adopted over 40 years ago to mitigate the effects of
infant formula marketing on a woman's decision to breastfeed. Yet, the
commercial formula milk industry has continued to market their products
aggressively and through an increasing variety of social media channels. This
study examines the impact of formula milk marketing on specific components of
the health system to understand how systems that are built to support and
sustain breastfeeding may have been captured and repurposed by industry
practices.
METHODS: As part of A Multi-country Study of Early Infant Feeding Decisions,
this qualitative study was conducted in two representative cities in China,
Beijing and Jinan, in 2020. The participants were recruited through convenience
sampling and snowballing sampling methods. Data were collected through 40
in-depth interviews and 10 focus group discussions with health professionals,
pregnant women, and formula milk marketing executives. A thematic analytical
method was used to analyze the main themes and sub-themes that detail the
characteristics of formula milk marketing and its impact on the health system in
China.
RESULTS: Our results identified the most common practices used by the formula
milk industry to reach health workers as well as mothers and their families
through health systems. Such practices include (1) provider/facility-based
marketing to sponsor academic activities (e.g., seminars, conferences, and
research projects) and promote specialized infant formula that targets health
care providers and facilities, which influence the health consultations and
recommendations provided by health professionals to mothers and families; and
(2) receiver-based marketing that targets Chinese women and increases marketing
exposure through lectures provided by maternity schools at health facilities
during the antenatal period and health promotion activities organized by formula
milk companies outside of facilities during the postnatal care period.
CONCLUSIONS: Formula milk marketing aims to influence the practices and services
within the health system in China, both directly through health professionals
and facilities, and also indirectly by targeting mothers. These marketing
strategies have impacted the perceptions of providers on formula milk, and
strategies targeting consumers have aimed to further influence and undermine
mothers' intentions to continue breastfeeding. Stricter regulation of industry
marketing practices is needed to create a supportive environment for mothers to
breastfeed.
BACKGROUND: Artificial intelligence (AI) chatbots, including ChatGPT-4 (GPT-4)
and Grok-1 (Grok), have been shown to be potentially useful in several medical
fields, but have not been examined in plastic and aesthetic surgery. The aim of
this study is to evaluate the responses of these AI chatbots for clinical
questions (CQs) related to the guidelines for implant-based breast
reconstruction (IBBR) published by the Japan Society of Plastic and
Reconstructive Surgery (JSPRS) in 2021.
METHODS: CQs in the JSPRS guidelines were used as question sources. Responses
from two AI chatbots, GPT-4 and Grok, were evaluated for accuracy,
informativeness, and readability by five Japanese Board-certified breast
reconstruction specialists and five Japanese clinical fellows of plastic
surgery.
RESULTS: GPT-4 outperformed Grok significantly in terms of accuracy (p < 0.001),
informativeness (p < 0.001), and readability (p < 0.001) when evaluated by
plastic surgery fellows. Compared to the original guidelines, Grok scored
significantly lower in all three areas (all p < 0.001). The accuracy of GPT-4
was rated to be significantly higher based on scores given by plastic surgery
fellows compared to those of breast reconstruction specialists (p = 0.012),
whereas there was no significant difference between these scores for Grok.
CONCLUSIONS: The study suggests that GPT-4 has the potential to assist in
interpreting and applying clinical guidelines for IBBR but importantly there is
still a risk that AI chatbots can misinform. Further studies are needed to
understand the broader role of current and future AI chatbots in breast
reconstruction surgery.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE IV: This journal requires that authors assign a level of
evidence to each article. For a full description of these Evidence-Based
Medicine Ratings, please refer to Table of Contents or online Instructions to
Authors www.springer.com/00266 .
BACKGROUND: Retrospective studies suggest that some breast cancer survivors
report treatment-associated hair loss or thinning years after their diagnosis.
This study investigates frequency and perceptions of alopecia persisting 6 years
after patients' breast cancer diagnoses.
METHODS: Breast cancer survivors participating in the Mayo Clinic Breast Disease
Registry (MCBDR) were mailed a survey 6 years after diagnosis. They were asked
about their degree of bother from hair thinning and hair loss and mental health
was explored.
RESULTS: A total of 969 of 1476 participants (65.7%) responded to the survey. Of
these, 755 patients were eligible for inclusion and had stage I-III breast
cancer. Respondents' median age was 65.6 years (35-95 years). Chemotherapy (±
endocrine therapy) was administered to 216 (29%) participants, and 342 (45%)
received only endocrine therapy. Nearly half (345, 46%) of respondents reported
hair loss and over half (431, 57%) reported hair thinning. Moderate to extreme
bother from hair loss was reported by 27% of chemotherapy recipients, by 18% of
endocrine therapy only recipients, and by 14% of patients who received neither.
Moderate to extreme bother from hair thinning was reported by 31% of
chemotherapy recipients, by 21% of endocrine therapy-only recipients, and by 19%
of those who had received neither. Hair growth product usage was reported by 31%
of chemotherapy recipients and 14% of endocrine therapy-only recipients.
CONCLUSIONS: Hair loss and thinning are frequently reported as persistently
bothersome symptoms by breast cancer survivors. Future investigations into the
incidence, predictors, and treatment of therapy-associated alopecia are needed.
BACKGROUND: Cancer is the leading cause of death worldwide. In the Americas, it
is also one of the leading causes of death. In Ecuador, studies on the burden of
disease are limited and none analyze or estimate the burden of all types of
cancer in a single study. Therefore, the aim of this study is to estimate the
years of life lost prematurely due to cancer in Ecuador from 2014 to 2022.
METHODS: Cross-sectional observational analysis study. The databases of general
deaths from the years 2014 to 2022, population projections from 2014 to 2021 and
the population census for the year 2022 of the Republic of Ecuador were used.
Deaths registered with ICD-10 code C00-C96 were included as deaths from cancer.
The mortality rate and years of life lost prematurely due to cancer were
estimated, considering the life tables of the Coale-Demeny West model and a
standard time discount of 3 % was implemented without weighting by age.
RESULTS: An increase in mortality and premature years of life lost was observed
in the period 2014-2019, but in 2020 a reduction in mortality was seen in
several types of cancer. In 2021 and 2022 mortality increased again, reaching
the maximum peak of mortality and premature years of life lost in the entire
study. Approximately 1,3 million years of life lost prematurely due to cancer
were estimated. The types of cancer with the greatest number of years of life
lost prematurely were malignant tumors of the stomach (188.180), uterus
(117.142), which include both uterine cancer and cervical cancer, and leukemia
(107.440). In men, in descending order, these were tumors of the stomach
(101.112), prostate (67.624) and leukemia (55.654), while in women, these were
malignant tumors of the uterus (117.142), breast (100.217) and stomach (87.067).
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study provide a broader basis for debate on
public health policies, efficient allocation of resources, and enable monitoring
of cancer and prevention strategies over time.
BACKGROUND: The low probability of identifying druggable mutations through
comprehensive genomic profiling (CGP) and its financial and time costs hinder
its widespread adoption. To enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of cancer
precision medicine, it is critical to identify patient characteristics that are
most likely to benefit from CGP.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This nationwide retrospective study employed machine
learning models to predict the identification of genome-matched therapies by
CGP, utilizing a national database covering 99.7% of the patients who underwent
CGP in Japan from June 2019 to November 2023. Prediction models were constructed
for the overall cancer population, specific cancer types, and adolescent and
young adult (AYA) group. The SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) algorithm was
applied to elucidate clinical features contributing to model predictions.
RESULTS: This study included 60 655 patients [mean age (standard deviation),
60.8 years (14.5 years); 50.1% males]. CGP identified at least one
genome-matched therapy in 11 227 cases (18.5%). The best prediction model was
eXtreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost) with an area under the receiver operating
characteristic curve of 0.819. Cancer type was the most important predictor
(negative for pancreas and positive for breast and lung), followed by the age,
presence of liver metastasis, and number of metastatic sites. Analysis of cancer
type-specific models identified several organ-specific features, including the
sex, interval between the cancer diagnosis and CGP, sampling site, and CGP
panel. Among 3455 AYA patients, genome-matched therapies were identified in 459
patients (13.3%). The AYA-specific model achieved an area under the receiver
operating characteristic curve of 0.768, with bone tumor identified as a
negative predictor in addition to those identified in the overall cancer
population model.
CONCLUSION: Several factors predicting the identification of genome-matched
therapies through CGP were identified for the overall cancer population and
cancer type-specific subpopulations. Expedited CGP is recommended for patients
who match the identified profile to facilitate early targeted therapy.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer-related lymphedema (BCRL) is a debilitating sequela
affecting up to 1 in 3 breast cancer survivors. Treatments are palliative and do
not address the underlying lymphatic injury. Recent preclinical and
nonrandomized studies have shown promising results using adipose-derived
regenerative cells (ADRCs) and lipotransfer in alleviating BCRL through
regeneration of lymphatic tissue. However, no randomized controlled trial has
been performed in an attempt to eliminate a placebo effect.
METHODS: This randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial included
patients with no-option, persistent disabling unilateral BCRL. Patients were
randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to receive either autologous ADRCs (4.20×10 7 ±
1.75×10 7 cells) and 30-cc lipotransfer or placebo (saline) to the axilla. The
primary outcome was a change in BCRL volume 1 year after treatment. Secondary
outcomes included changes in quality of life, indocyanine green lymphangiography
stage, bioimpedance, and safety.
RESULTS: Eighty patients were included, of whom 39 were allocated to ADRCs and
lipotransfer treatment and 41 to placebo treatment. Baseline characteristics
were similar in the groups. One year after treatment, no objective improvements
were observed in the treatment or placebo groups. In contrast, significant
subjective improvements were noted for both the treatment and placebo groups.
CONCLUSIONS: This trial failed to confirm a benefit of ADRCs and lipotransfer in
the treatment of BCRL. These nonconfirmatory results suggest that ADRC and
lipotransfer should not be recommended for alleviating BCRL. However, the
authors cannot exclude that repeated treatments or higher doses of ADRCs or
lipotransfer could yield a clinical effect.
CLINICAL QUESTION/LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Therapeutic, I.
BACKGROUND: Preclinical cell tracking is enhanced with a multimodal imaging
approach. Bioluminescence imaging (BLI) is a highly sensitive optical modality
that relies on engineering cells to constitutively express a luciferase gene.
Magnetic particle imaging (MPI) is a newer imaging modality that directly
detects superparamagnetic iron oxide (SPIO) particles used to label cells. Here,
we compare BLI and MPI for imaging cells in vitro and in vivo.
METHODS: Mouse 4T1 breast carcinoma cells were transduced to express firefly
luciferase, labeled with SPIO (ProMag), and imaged as cell samples after
subcutaneous injection into mice.
RESULTS: For cell samples, the BLI and MPI signals were strongly correlated with
cell number. Both modalities presented limitations for imaging cells in vivo.
For BLI, weak signal penetration, signal attenuation, and scattering prevented
the detection of cells for mice with hair and for cells far from the tissue
surface. For MPI, background signals obscured the detection of low cell numbers
due to the limited dynamic range, and cell numbers could not be accurately
quantified from in vivo images.
CONCLUSIONS: It is important to understand the shortcomings of these imaging
modalities to develop strategies to improve cellular detection sensitivity.
BACKGROUND: This multicenter and retrospective study investigated the additive
value of tumor morphologic features derived from the functional tumor volume
(FTV) tumor mask at pre-treatment (T0) and the early treatment time point (T1)
in the prediction of pathologic outcomes for breast cancer patients undergoing
neoadjuvant chemotherapy.
METHODS: A total of 910 patients enrolled in the multicenter I-SPY 2 trial were
included. FTV and tumor morphologic features were calculated from the dynamic
contrast-enhanced (DCE) MRI. A poor response was defined as a residual cancer
burden (RCB) class III (RCB-III) at surgical excision. The area under the
receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) was used to evaluate the
predictive performance. The analysis was performed in the full cohort and in
individual sub-cohorts stratified by hormone receptor (HR) and human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) status.
RESULTS: In the full cohort, the AUCs for the use of the FTV ratio and
clinicopathologic data were 0.64 ± 0.03 (mean ± SD [standard deviation]). With
morphologic features, the AUC increased significantly to 0.76 ± 0.04 (p <
0.001). The ratio of the surface area to volume ratio between T0 and T1 was
found to be the most contributing feature. All top contributing features were
from T1. An improvement was also observed in the HR+/HER2- and triple-negative
sub-cohorts. The AUC increased significantly from 0.56 ± 0.05 to 0.70 ± 0.06 (p
< 0.001) and from 0.65 ± 0.06 to 0.73 ± 0.06 (p < 0.001), respectively, when
adding morphologic features.
CONCLUSION: Tumor morphologic features can improve the prediction of RCB-III
compared to using FTV only at the early treatment time point.
BACKGROUND: Screening for non-communicable diseases (NCDs) is a critical step
for early detection and the prevention of consequent morbidity and mortality. To
facilitate NCD screening, the Ethiopian Ministry of Health has developed
screening guidelines. However, like other low- and middle-income countries,
interventions to increase the uptake of NCD-screening services in Ethiopia
remain ineffective. Thus, this study aimed to determine the effectiveness of
service delivery models to increase NCD-screening service uptake in
south-central Ethiopia.
METHOD: A health-facility-based quasi-experimental study design was employed to
determine the effectiveness of providing a multiple-NCD-screening service in
addition to social- and behavioral-change communication (SBCC) intervention to
increase the uptake of NCD-screening services. The interviewer-administered
structured questionnaire was adapted from previously published research and used
to collect data during the baseline and end-line survey periods. A
difference-in-differences analysis was used to determine the effectiveness of
the intervention.
RESULTS: Compared with routine care, the availability of a
multiple-NCD-screening service, together with SBCC intervention, was found to
significantly increase the uptake of cervical cancer screening, clinical breast
examination, blood pressure measurement, and blood glucose-measurement services,
by 18, 9, 44 and 23 percent points, respectively. However, the availability of a
multiple-NCD-screening service without SBCC intervention increased clinical
breast-examination service uptake by 9% point and blood glucose-measurement
service uptake by 18% point without increasing the uptake of cervical
cancer-screening or blood pressure-measurement services.
CONCLUSION: The integration of multiple-NCD-screening services accompanied by
SBCC intervention that promotes them is an important approach for improving the
uptake of NCD-screening services.
BACKGROUND: This study aimed to compare the efficacy of CDK4/6 inhibitors plus
endocrine therapy in two groups of patients with HR-positive/HER2-negative
metastatic breast cancer: those with symptomatic, high tumor burden disease and
those with asymptomatic disease.
DESIGN AND METHODS: This retrospective study included 193 patients who received
either ribociclib or palbociclib in combination with first-line ET. Patients
were divided into symptomatic and asymptomatic groups and compared regarding
baseline characteristics and progression-free survivals (PFS).
RESULTS: Symptomatic patients had a significantly shorter mPFS than asymptomatic
patients (22.7 months vs. 35.0 months, p = 0.009). Among symptomatic patients,
those treated with ribociclib had a longer mPFS than those treated with
palbociclib (28.26 months vs. 17.18 months, p = 0.021). Multivariate analysis
identified the symptomatic disease and liver metastasis as independent
predictors of shorter mPFS (HR; 1.835, 95% CI; 1.146-2.939 and HR; 2.433, 95%
CI; 1.329-4.454, respectively).
CONCLUSION: Our analysis revealed that although symptomatic individuals who
underwent CDK4/6 inhibitor plus ET experienced a significant reduction in mPFS
durations compared to asymptomatic patients, the 22-month mPFS indicated that
CDK4/6 inhibitor plus ET is an effective treatment option.
BACKGROUND: Metal nanoparticles (NPs) have widely been investigated due to their
several applications in therapeutic activities. The current investigation
highlights the cytotoxic effects of the eco-friendly phytosynthesis route for
silver nanoparticles using Lythrum salicaria (L. salicaria) extract (AgNPs-LS).
METHODS AND RESULTS: The change in color from colorless to brown confirmed the
reduction of silver ions to AgNPs. x-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis demonstrated
high crystallinity. The surface morphology of AgNPs-LS was spherical, and their
average sizes were 50 nm. energy-dispersive x-ray analysis (EDAX) confirmed that
silver was the predominant component, indicating the involvement of L. salicaria
plant extract in the green synthesis process. In vitro dimethyl thiazolyl
tetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay showed significant cytotoxicity of AgNPs-LS
against MCF7 cells, with an IC50 of 113 µg mL- 1. In contrast, AgNPs-LS showed
minimal cytotoxicity to HEK293 cells (IC50: 254 µg mL- 1), demonstrating a
higher sensitivity of cancer cells to AgNPs-LS. Moreover, AgNPs-LS resulted in
MCF7 cells producing reactive oxygen species (ROS) and undergoing cell cycle
arrest at the G2/M phase, serving as barriers to the proliferation of cancer
cells. Annexin V fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) assays and fluorescence
microscopy confirmed the induction of apoptosis in MCF7 cells by AgNPs-LS. Gene
expression analysis revealed upregulated pro-apoptotic genes (Bax, p53,
caspase-3, and caspase-9) and downregulated an anti-apoptotic gene (Bcl2) in
michigan cancer foundation7 (MCF7) cells treated with AgNPs-LS.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that AgNPs-LS induced apoptosis via the
intrinsic pathway (mitochondrial-mediated mechanism) and involved p53-dependent
regulation. The current study results implied that AgNPs-LS fabricated by a
bio-green approach could be helpful to the future of nanomedicine.
BACKGROUND: Consensus regarding the hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy
(HIPEC) for colorectal cancer (CRC) regimen remains elusive. In this study,
patient-derived tumor organoids from CRC were utilized as a preclinical model
for in vitro drug testing of HIPEC regimens commonly used in clinical practice.
This approach was used to facilitate the clinical formulation of HIPEC.
METHOD: Tumor tissues and corresponding clinical data were obtained from
patients diagnosed with CRC at the Sixth Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen
University. Qualified samples were cultured and passaged. We aimed to assess the
sensitivity of in vitro hyperthermic perfusion using five different regimens,
i.e. mitomycin C, mitomycin C combined with cisplatin, mitomycin C combined with
5-fluorouracil, oxaliplatin, and oxaliplatin combined with 5-fluorouracil.
RESULTS: Tumor organoids obtained from 46 patients with CRC were cultured, and
in vitro hyperthermic perfusion experiments were conducted on 42 organoids using
five different regimens. The average inhibition rate of mitomycin C was 85.2%
(95% confidence interval [CI] 80.4-89.9%), mitomycin C combined with cisplatin
was 85.5% (95% CI 80.2-90.7%), mitomycin C combined with 5-fluorouracil was
65.6% (95% CI 59.6-71.6%), oxaliplatin was 37.9% (95% CI 31.5-44.3%), and
oxaliplatin combined with 5-fluorouracil was 40.7% (95% CI 33.9-47.5%).
CONCLUSION: In vitro hyperthermic perfusion demonstrates that the inhibition
rate of mitomycin C, both alone and in combination with cisplatin, surpasses
that of the combination of mitomycin C with 5-fluorouracil and oxaliplatin. In
clinical practice, the combination of mitomycin C and cisplatin can be regarded
as the optimal choice for HIPEC in CRC.
BACKGROUND: HER2 + breast cancer is a malignant neoplasm with a high degree of
aggressiveness and therapeutic challenge. In recent years, studies have
indicated a strong correlation between TTK and various tumors, though its role
in HER2 + BRCA remains unclear.
OBJECTIVES: Studying the biological function of the TTK gene in HER2 + BRCA and
its resistance to targeted therapy it provides new ideas for targeted drug
research.
METHODS: TTK was knocked down by small interfering RNA transfection, and its
biological function in HER2 + BRCA cells was verified, and its mechanism of
action was verified by RT-PCR and Western blot.
RESULTS: The study demonstrated that TTK promoted cell proliferation and
migration by activating the Akt/mTOR pathway in HER2 + breast cancer and
enhanced the drug sensitivity of BRCA cell lines SKBR3 and BT474 to pyrotinib,
in addition, knockdown of TTK induced apoptosis and arrested cells in G1 phase.
CONCLUSION: Which implies that TTK is an oncogene in HER2 + BRCA and is a
valuable research target.
BACKGROUND: Despite the significant advancements in antiemetic regimens for
preventing chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV), over 40% of cancer
patients undergoing chemotherapy still experience CINV in clinical practice. To
figure out underlying reasons and outline the landscape of antiemetic
prophylaxis for CINV, our focus centered on cisplatin, one of the most commonly
used highly emetogenic chemotherapy drugs. We aimed to elucidate trends in CINV
management by analyzing data extracted from cisplatin-based clinical trials.
METHODS: We extracted CINV-related data from 156 eligible randomized clinical
trials, comprising 39 antiemetic trials and 117 non-antiemetic trials, all with
patients undergoing high-dose cisplatin-based chemotherapy. Subsequently, we
conducted separate analyses of the extracted CINV data within antiemetic and
non-antiemetic trial groups, as well as comparisons between them.
RESULTS: Over the years, both antiemetic and non-antiemetic trials showed
significant improvements in no-vomiting rates, although gains in no-nausea rates
were more modest. Notably, antiemetic trials frequently underreported outcomes
related to nausea control. There was a distinct yet gradually narrowing
disparity in vomiting control rates between antiemetic and non-antiemetic trials
during the same time frame. While non-antiemetic trials achieved comparable CINV
control rates using the same antiemetic regimen as antiemetic trials, they
exhibited significantly greater variations in no-vomiting and no-nausea rates.
CONCLUSIONS: The landscape of CINV management in cisplatin-based chemotherapy
has evolved significantly alongside improvements in antiemetic agents.
Substantial progress has been made in emesis control within both antiemetic and
non-antiemetic cisplatin-based clinical trials. More attention should be paid on
the chemotherapy induced nausea, and multiple approaches are needed to increase
guideline adherence in future clinical practice.
BACKGROUND: In a convenience sample of women scheduled for chemotherapy for
early-stage breast cancer, we investigated associations of the Center for
Disease Control and Prevention's neighborhood-level social vulnerability index
(SVI) with pretreatment demographics and patient-reported outcome (PRO) measures
(health behavior, function and quality of life, treatment toxicities during
chemotherapy).
METHODS: The SVI Overall score is comprised of 4 themes: socioeconomic,
household composition, minority status/language, and household
type/transportation, with scores ranging from 0 = lowest to 1 = highest
vulnerability neighborhoods. Participant SVI scores were derived from zip codes
listed in the patient's address within the electronic medical record (EMR).
Associations of study variables with SVI were evaluated using Spearman
correlation for continuous variables and Kruskal-Wallis tests for categorical
variables.
RESULTS: In a sample of 309 women, the mean age was 56 years (range 23-83) and
75% White. Greater vulnerability SVI Overall score was associated with lower
education (P =.02), nonmarriage (P ≤.0001), higher body mass index (P =.03), and
prechemotherapy PRO measures such as fewer self-reported walking minutes/week (P
≤.001), history of smoking (P =.02) and alcohol use (P < .001), depression
(P =.01), and lower emotional social support (P =.008). During chemotherapy,
moderate, severe, or very severe symptoms were associated with greater
vulnerability SVI Overall scores for hot flashes (P =.03), arthralgia (P =.02),
myalgia (P =.02), peripheral neuropathy (P =.01), edema of limbs (P =.04), and
nausea (P <.001).
CONCLUSIONS: SVI scores derived from addresses in the patient's EMR can be used
to generate information that adds to the patient's social history in ways that
are informative for anticipating and monitoring chemotherapy-related toxicities.
BACKGROUND: To explore the blood components of ginger volatile oil (GVO) after
gastric perfusion in rats and its different metabolites from blank serum and the
network pharmacological analysis and preliminary verification of the main
components against breast cancer.
METHODS: A total of 20 male rats were randomly allocated to 10 control groups
and 10 experimental groups. The administration group was given diluted GVO and
the blank group was given the same amount of soybean oil (weigh 12 g of GVO
diluted to 100 ml with soybean oil), the serum of rats in the given and blank
groups was analyzed by gas chromatography-time-of-flight mass spectrometry, and
the differential metabolites were screened and enriched, and the blood
components were analyzed by ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography coupled
with quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometry (UPLC-Q-TOF-MS).
RESULTS: A total of 34 different metabolites were screened, and 31 original
components were identified. The content of citral in volatile oil and serum is
high, and the pathway of action is also closely related to the results of
network pharmacology. Cell experiments showed that both drug-containing serum
and citral significantly inhibited the proliferation and lateral transfer
ability of breast cancer MCF-7 cells in a concentration and time-dependent
manner, flow cytometry was used to measure apoptosis, and the experimental
results showed that the proportion of early and late apoptosis was significantly
increased in each group compared with the control group, and the proportion of
total apoptosis showed a certain concentration-dependent trend.
CONCLUSIONS: A combination of serum metabolism, network pharmacology, and
experiments was employed; this study offers a significant contribution to the
clarification of the material basis and molecular mechanism of GVO- medicated
serum against breast cancer.
BACKGROUND: The prediction of ISLN pCR after neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC)
based on inflammatory markers and its prognostic value have rarely been
investigated.
METHODS: Patients diagnosed with ISLN-involved breast cancer who received NAC in
West China Hospital between September 2009 and December 2020 were enrolled in
the derivation cohort for model construction and survival analysis, and patients
with the same criteria between January 2021 and July 2024 were involved in
validation cohort for external validation. After randomly dividing patients into
training and testing groups at 7:3 ratio, a nomogram predicting ISLN pCR was
constructed based on logistic regression in training group. Internal validation
was performed in the testing group and external validation was performed in the
independent validation cohort. The ROC curves were applied to validate the
accuracy of the model. Survival analysis was performed using Kaplan-Meier plots.
RESULTS: A total of 120 eligible patients were involved in the derivation cohort
to establish the nomogram (84 patients in training group and 36 patients in
testing group), and 45 patients were involved in the independent validation
cohort for external validation of the nomogram. Pretreatment NLR and hormone
receptor (HR) status, as well as preoperative SII, CEA, CA15-3 and anti-HER2
therapy were included in the nomogram predicting ISLN pCR. The AUC were 0.906
(95% CI 0.837-0.975, P<0.001), 0.888 (95% CI 0.751-1.000, P<0.001) and 0.828
(95% CI 0.703-0.953, P< 0.001) in training, testing groups and the validation
cohort respectively. ISLN pCR was significantly associated with better prognosis
(all P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: Inflammatory factors combined with tumor makers, hormone receptor
status and anti-HER2 therapy could predict ISLN pCR effectively, which was
significantly associated with improved survival outcomes.
BACKGROUND: Increasing evidence suggests that the CXC chemokine receptor 6
(CXCR6) is involved in tumor progression and the regulation of tumor immunity.
However, its role in muscle-invasive bladder cancer (MIBC) remains largely
unexplored.
METHODS: Data from 391 MIBC patients in the TCGA, 212 patients from GEO, 131
patients from our center, 195 patients in the IMvigor210 cohort, and single-cell
RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) data from 9 bladder cancer patients (GSE222315) were
analyzed. Additionally, data from the GEPIA 2, TISCH2, TIMER2.0, and UALCAN
platforms were utilized to investigate the prognostic and immunotherapeutic
significance of CXCR6 in MIBC.
RESULTS: We observed that CXCR6 expression was significantly reduced in bladder
cancer tumors and correlated with tumor stage and grade. Low CXCR6 expression
was associated with poor recurrence-free survival (RFS) and overall survival
(OS) in the TCGA cohort, a finding validated in both the meta-GEO dataset and
our center's cohort. Multivariate analysis confirmed that low CXCR6 expression
was an independent predictor of poor OS and RFS. A nomogram incorporating CXCR6
expression and other independent prognostic factors was developed to accurately
predict 3- and 5-year OS. Gene set enrichment analysis indicated that immune
activation-related pathways were significantly enriched in tumors with high
CXCR6 expression. CIBERSORT analysis revealed that CXCR6 expression was
positively correlated with CD8+ T cells, CD4+ T cells, activated NK cells, M1
macrophages, and activated dendritic cells in TCGA, findings further validated
by TIMER2.0. scRNA-seq data showed that CXCR6 was predominantly expressed in T
and NK cells and facilitated T/NK-myeloid interaction via the CXCR6-CXCL16 axis.
Importantly, CXCL16+ macrophages and dendritic cells recruited CXCR6+ T and NK
cells, which exhibited enhanced cytotoxicity, thereby amplifying anti-tumor
immunity. Clinically, in the IMvigor210 immunotherapy cohort, higher CXCR6
expression was associated with improved anti-PD-L1 therapeutic outcomes.
CONCLUSION: Our findings highlight CXCR6 as a critical biomarker for predicting
prognosis and immunotherapeutic response in MIBC.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer poses a significant public health challenge in
Tanzania. Limited knowledge about breast cancer and negative attitudes toward
screening practices contributes to delayed diagnoses and poorer patient
outcomes. Catholic nuns, who are often nulliparous, represent a population with
an increased risk of developing breast cancer. Despite this risk, they remain an
understudied group regarding breast cancer awareness and screening practices.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to assess breast cancer knowledge and attitudes
toward screening practices among Catholic nuns residing in Tanzania's Lake Zone.
STUDY DESIGN: The study was a cross-sectional design.
METHODS: A total of 385 Catholic nuns participated in the study. To ensure a
representative sample, nuns were chosen through simple random sampling, giving
each Catholic nun an equal probability of being selected. Data were collected
using a self-administered questionnaire and then analyzed using STATA version
18.0. Both descriptive and inferential statistics were used to draw conclusions.
In inferential statistics, logistic regression was used to test for associations
between categorical variables. The test statistics were considered significant
when the P-value was less than .05 at a 95% confidence interval (CI).
RESULTS: This study enrolled 385 catholic nuns. 57.1% (95% CI, 52.0%-62.1%) of
all surveyed catholic nuns had inadequate knowledge of breast cancer.
Misconceptions also emerged as significant risk factors for inadequate
knowledge. Thus, lack of awareness of breast cancer risk factors increased the
odds by 5.57 times (adjusted odds ratio [AOR]: 5.57; 95% CI: 2.84-10.92;
P < .001). In addition, believing cancer was not inheritable (AOR: 2.65; 95% CI:
1.14-6.15; P = .024), misperceiving oneself as being in a low-risk group (AOR:
1.65; 95% CI: 1.03-2.66; P = .039), and underestimating the vulnerable age group
(believing it is not above 40 years) (AOR: 2.60; 95% CI: 1.49-4.51; P = .001)
were all significantly associated with higher odds of inadequate knowledge.
Regarding the attitude toward breast cancer screening practices, 62.3% (95% CI,
57.3%-67.2%) of the catholic nuns had negative attitudes.
CONCLUSION: These findings highlight the need for breast health intervention
educational programs to improve breast cancer awareness among Catholic nuns.
Such programs should address risk factors, symptoms, screening methods, and
treatment options, dispelling misconceptions. By empowering nuns with knowledge,
they can make informed decisions about their health and take charge of their
well-being.
BACKGROUND: Transportation noise has been linked with breast cancer, but
existing literature is conflicting. One proposed mechanism is that
transportation noise disrupts sleep and the circadian rhythm. We investigated
the relationships between road traffic noise, DNA methylation in circadian
rhythm genes, and breast cancer. We selected 610 female participants (318 breast
cancer cases and 292 controls) enrolled into the Malmö, Diet, and Cancer cohort.
DNA methylation of CpGs (N = 29) in regulatory regions of circadian rhythm genes
(CRY1, BMAL1, CLOCK, and PER1) was assessed by pyrosequencing of DNA from
lymphocytes collected at enrollment. To assess associations between modeled
5-year mean residential road traffic noise and differentially methylated CpG
positions, we used linear regression models adjusting for potential confounders,
including sociodemographics, shiftwork, and air pollution. Linear mixed effects
models were used to evaluate road traffic noise and differentially methylated
regions. Unconditional logistic regression was used to investigate CpG
methylation and breast cancer.
RESULTS: We found that higher mean road traffic noise was associated with lower
DNA methylation of three CRY1 CpGs (CpG1, CpG2, and CpG12) and three BMAL1 CpGs
(CpG2, CpG6, and CpG7). Road traffic noise was also associated with differential
methylation of CRY1 and BMAL1 promoters. In CRY1 CpG2 and CpG5 and in CLOCK
CpG1, increasing levels of methylation tended to be associated with lower odds
of breast cancer, with odds ratios (OR) of 0.88 (95% confidence interval (CI)
0.76-1.02), 0.84 (95% CI 0.74-0.96), and 0.80 (95% CI 0.68-0.94), respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: In summary, our data suggest that DNA hypomethylation in CRY1 and
BMAL1 could be part of a causal chain from road traffic noise to breast cancer.
This is consistent with the hypothesis that disruption of the circadian rhythm,
e.g., from road traffic noise exposure, increases the risk of breast cancer.
Since no prior studies have explored this association, it is essential to
replicate our results.
BACKGROUND: Papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) frequently metastasises to lymph
nodes, with lymph node metastasis (LNM) occurring with high frequency in small,
early-stage tumors. The present study examines the inverse l-shaped relationship
between tumor size and the likelihood of LNM in patients diagnosed with PTC.
METHODS: We performed a detailed retrospective cohort analysis of 48,021 cases
of papillary thyroid cancer using data from the Epidemiology, and End Results
(SEER) database from 1992 to 2019. Our study used various analytical methods,
including logistic regression, spline curve fitting, and variable interaction
assessment, to clarify the association between tumor size and LNM rates. We
rigorously controlled for potential confounders such as patient age, sex,
ethnicity, tumor size, extrathyroidal extension (ETE), histopathological
characteristics and distant metastases. In addition, we thoroughly investigated
and quantitatively assessed the relationship between adjusted tumor size
measurements and the likelihood of LNM development.
RESULTS: The median tumor size among the 48,021 patients diagnosed with PTC was
1.3 cm. Among these patients, 12,365 (25.75%) had LNM, with a median tumor size
of 1.9 cm in this group. A comparative analysis shows a significant difference
in tumor sizes between PTC patients who were LNM-positive and those who were
LNM-negative. The relationship between tumor size and the likelihood of LNM
exhibits a distinct nonlinear pattern. Specifically, below a diameter threshold
of 1.978 cm, the probability of LNM significantly increases with larger tumor
sizes (odds ratio [OR] = 2.363, 95% confidence Interval [CI]: 2.214-2.523). Once
this threshold is surpassed, the effect of tumor size on LNM incidence levels
off (OR = 1.031, 95% CI: 1.003-1.061).
CONCLUSION: The results of this study confirm that tumor size significantly
determines the likelihood of LNM in patients with PTC. We found an inverse
l-shaped relationship between tumor size and the probability of LNM. As the
tumor size increased below 1.978 cm, the likelihood of LNM increased, but not
with tumor size above that threshold. These findings provide new insights into
the complex relationship between tumor size and LNM in PTC.
BACKGROUND: The clinically high comorbidity between polycystic ovary syndrome
(PCOS) and breast cancer (BC) has been extensively reported. However, limited
knowledge exists regarding their shared genetic basis and underlying mechanisms.
METHOD: Leveraging summary statistics from the largest genome-wide association
studies (GWASs) to date, we conducted a comprehensive genome-wide cross-trait
analysis of PCOS and BC. A variety of genetic statistical methods were employed
to uncover potential shared genetic causes.
RESULTS: Our analysis revealed genetic overlap between the three trait pairs.
After partitioning the genome into 2,495 independent regions, we identified two
loci, chr8: 75,011,700-76,295,483 and chr17: 6,305,079-7,264,458, with
significant localized genetic correlations. Pleiotropic analysis under a
composite null hypothesis identified 1,183 significant pleiotropic single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) across three trait pairs. FUMA mapped 26
pleiotropic loci, with regions 16q12.2 and 6q25.1 duplicated across all three
trait pairs, while COLOC detected three loci with colocalization evidence.
Gene-based analysis identified 23 unique candidate pleiotropic genes, including
the FTO shared by all trait pairs, as well as SER1, RALB, and others in two
trait pairs. Pathway enrichment analysis further highlighted key biological
pathways, primarily involving the significant biological pathways were the
metabolism of regulation of autophagy, regulation of cellular catabolic process,
and positive regulation of catabolic process. Latent Heritable Confounder
Mendelian randomization (LHC-MR) supported a positive causal relationship
between PCOS and both BCALL and ERPBC but not with ERNBC.
CONCLUSION: In conclusion, our genome-wide cross-trait analysis identified a
shared genetic basis between PCOS and BC, specific identical genetic mechanisms
and causality between PCOS and various BC subtypes, which could better explains
the genetics of the co-morbidity of PCOS and ERPBC rather than PCOS and ERNBC.
These findings provide new insights into the biological mechanisms underlying
the co-morbidity of these two complex diseases, which have important
implications for clinical disease intervention, treatment, and improved
prognosis.
BACKGROUND: The clinical management of breast cancer (BC) is mainly based on the
assessment of receptor expression by tumour cells. However, there is still an
unmet need for novel biomarkers important for prognosis and therapy. The tumour
immune microenvironment (TIME) is thought to play a key role in prognosis and
therapy selection, therefore this study aimed to describe the TIME in Ethiopian
BC patients.
METHODS: RNA was isolated from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue
from 82 women with BC. Expression of PAM50 and 54 immune genes was analysed
using the Nanostring platform and differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were
determined using ROSALIND®. The abundance of different cell populations was
estimated using Nanostring's cell type profiling module, while tumour
infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) were analysed using haematoxylin and eosin (H&E)
staining. In addition, the PIK3CA gene was genotyped for three hotspot mutations
using qPCR. Kaplan-Meier survival analysis and log-rank test were performed to
compare the prognostic relevance of immune subgroups.
RESULTS: Four discrete immune phenotypes (IP1-4) were identified through
hierarchical clustering of immune gene expression data. These IPs were
characterized by DEGs associated with both immune activation and inhibition as
well as variations in the extent of immune infiltration. However, there were no
significant differences regarding PIK3CA mutations between the IPs. A
downregulation of immune suppressive and activating genes and the lowest number
of infiltrating immune cells were found in IP2, which was associated with
luminal tumours. In contrast, IP4 displayed an active TME chracterized by an
upregulation of cytotoxic genes and the highest density of immune cell
infiltrations, independent of the specific intrinsic subtype. IP1 and IP3
exhibited intermediate characteristics. The IPs had a prognostic relevance and
patients with an active TME had improved overall survival compared to IPs with a
significant downregulation of the majority of immune genes.
CONCLUSION: Immune gene expression profiling identified four distinct immune
contextures of the TME with unique gene expression patterns and immune
infiltration. The classification into distinct immune subgroups may provide
important information regarding prognosis and the selection of patients
undergoing conventional treatments or immunotherapies.
BACKGROUND: Exposures to endocrine disrupting chemicals (EDCs) have been linked
to chronic diseases including breast cancer, metabolic syndrome, diabetes, and
infertility. Exposure during pregnancy may have a lifelong impact on the fetus.
Services are needed to allow individuals to learn about their personal EDC
exposures and how to reduce them. Million Marker (MM) aims to crowdsource and
scale the biomonitoring of environmental chemicals and provide actionable
results to empower individuals to proactively assess, track, and reduce their
EDC exposures. In previous research, we developed and tested the first mobile
EDC intervention service (mail-in urine testing and exposure report-back) for
its efficacy in increasing EH literacy (EHL), willingness to reduce exposures
(i.e., readiness to change, RtC), and system usability. After intervention, we
found increased EHL, increased RtC in women (but not men), and decreased EDC
exposure. However, some participants did not increase their RtC and had
difficulty carrying out the intervention on their own. The reasons for these
less optimal results were the difficulty in the EHL subject matter-participants
still felt ill-prepared to apply their knowledge to making healthier lifestyle
changes. Therefore, in this study, we will address these perceived limitations.
METHODS: We will test a self-directed online interactive curriculum with live
counseling sessions and individualized support modeled after the highly
effective Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP). Recruiting from the Healthy Nevada
Project (HNP), one of the largest population health cohorts in the world, we
test the effectiveness of our EDC-specific online intervention curriculum via
EHL and RtC surveys and determine changes in EDC exposure before and after
intervention in a randomized controlled trial. We will also test for common
clinical biomarkers via a commercially available at-home test (Siphox). We will
recruit and randomize 300 women and 300 men of reproductive age (total n=600)
from HNP. Our target population is men and women of reproductive age (18-44
years old).
DISCUSSION: At the conclusion of this project, we will be well-positioned to
scale our services to clinics and the general public, with the eventual aims of
FDA approval, insurance coverage, and incorporation into routine clinical care.
BACKGROUND: Correctly, performing breast self-examination (BSE) has an important
role in the early diagnosis of breast cancer and prevention of women's mortality
due to it. The present study aimed to investigate the effect of virtual
education programs on breast self-examination, self-efficacy, and skills.
METHODS: This quasi-experimental study was conducted on 146 women who were
18-59 years old (73 in each intervention, and control group) working in Fars Oil
Industry. Data collection tools included the researcher-made knowledge
questionnaire (10 items), the self-efficacy questionnaire of Champion and Scott
(10 item), and Wood's breast self-examination skill questionnaire (23 items).
The participants were selected by systematic random sampling and divided into
intervention and control groups through Permuted blocks randomization. A
four-week virtual educational interventions were conducted for the intervention
group through the WhatsApp messenger by sharing educational videos, booklets,
and posters. The control group received no education. The questionnaires were
completed by both groups, before and two months after the intervention. Data
were analyzed in SPSS version 22 using frequency descriptive statistics,
independent t-test, and paired t-test.
RESULTS: The knowledge mean scores showed no significant differences in
participants in the two groups before and after the intervention. The mean score
of self-efficacy increased significantly, in both the intervention (p < 0.001)
and control (P = 0.025) groups. After the intervention, the mean scores of BSE
skills in the intervention group were significantly (p < 0.001) higher than the
control group.
CONCLUSION: Virtual education using social networks alone is not able to
increase and improve all aspects of BSE skills sufficiently.
BACKGROUND: Appropriate immobilization setup for postmastectomy radiotherapy may
help to improve tumor control and to reduce radiation-related toxicities. This
study aims at retrospectively evaluate the outcome and toxicities of
postmastectomy radiotherapy (PMRT) with a novel integral cervicothoracic
thermoplastic mask strategy.
METHODS: Breast cancer patients were treated with modified radical mastectomy
and PMRT. Patient immobilization setup was performed with the placement of a
1-cm thickened wax film on the ipsilateral chest wall and an integral
cervicothoracic thermoplastic mask. PMRT was delivered according to the
institutional protocol. Dose distribution, disease control, patient survival and
radiation-induced toxicities were evaluated.
RESULTS: Four-hundred nineteen eligible patients with complete follow-up
information were included in the final analysis. The median follow-up was 40.2
(95%CI: 38.9-41.6) months. Two (0.5%) patients had local recurrence and 48
(11.4%) patients had distant metastasis. There were 22 (5.3%) deaths from all
causes, of which 19 were caused by breast cancer. The 3-year overall survival
(OS) rate was 94.8%. ER status, PR status, triple negative status, and T stages
were significantly related to patient survival (p < 0.05). HER2 expression, N
stage were not significantly related to patient survival. Most common
radiation-induced toxicities included grade I (87.6%) and grade II (10.2%)
dermatitis, and grade I pneumonitis (28.9%) found by chest X-ray or CT scans. No
clinical detectable cardiovascular event related to radiotherapy was identified.
CONCLUSION: Postmastectomy radiotherapy with integral cervicothoracic
thermoplastic mask leads to favorable outcome and moderate toxicities compared
with results reported in literature and might be of clinical significance in
breast cancer patient. However, this approach has not been compared directly
with postmastectomy radiotherapy without immobilization, and its applicability
in other regions with different treatment protocols requires further
investigation.
BACKGROUND: In this study, we aimed to evaluate color differences of the skin
paddle in autologous breast reconstruction performed using the deep inferior
epigastric artery perforator (DIEP) flap and the profunda artery perforator
(PAP) flap. The primary focus was to compare the color match between the
reconstructed breast skin and the donor-site skin, to achieve optimal esthetic
results.
METHODS: A retrospective analysis was performed on patients who had undergone
unilateral breast reconstruction with a DIEP flap or a PAP flap between January
2020 and December 2022. The colors were captured using a digital camera and
analyzed using Adobe Photoshop 2024 software. The L*, a*, and b* coordinates
were used. The International Commission on Illumination Delta E 2000 (CIEDE2000)
score was used to quantify color differences, comparing skin tones of the
unaffected breast, DIEP flap, PAP flap, abdomen, and medial thigh.
RESULTS: A total of 125 patients were analyzed. The DIEP flap demonstrated a
closer color match to the native breast skin compared with the PAP flap
(CIEDE2000 scores, 5.29 vs. 8.69, p < 0.01). No significant difference in color
deformity with time was found between the DIEP flap and the PAP flap (CIEDE2000
scores, 5.61 vs. 8.25, p = 0.17).
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that the DIEP flap results in a more favorable
color match for breast reconstruction than the PAP flap, enhancing esthetic
outcomes. These results underscore the importance of considering skin color
matching in flap selection for breast reconstruction surgery.
BACKGROUND: The aim of the paper is to present a single-center experience with
two-stage pre-pectoral breast reconstruction using tissue expander entirely
covered by acellular dermal matrix (ADM), reporting surgical indications,
technique, clinical and histological outcomes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A prospectively maintained database of consecutive
patients who had undergone immediate pre-pectoral expander-based breast
reconstruction with ADM over a two years period (2019-2021) was analyzed. The
primary clinical outcome measures included patients' subjective assessment of
satisfaction and pain. Secondary outcomes were complication rates, the frequency
of readmissions and incidence of capsular contracture. All patients underwent
ultrasound examination 3 weeks postoperatively and at the end of tissue
expansion completion. Histological examination of the periprosthetic tissue was
performed during the second stage of the reconstructive procedure.
RESULTS: A total of 46 patients with a mean age of 46.5 years (range: 24-62)
underwent collectively 54 breast reconstructions with a mean follow-up of 22.5
months after definitive implant placement. The time to reach the final volume
was on average 47.2 days (range 40-58). Complications occurred in 14 (25.9%)
breast reconstructions: 11 (20.4%) seromas, 2 (3.7%) infections, 1 (1.8%) flap
necroses, 2(3.7%) expander removals. Overall scores for Satisfaction were all
significantly increased after surgery. Histological examination revealed
complete ADM integration in the host tissue, with thinner, less sclerotic tissue
compared to the submuscular capsular samples.
CONCLUSIONS: Tissue expander-ADM-based breast reconstruction can be safely used
in selected cases for two-stage pre-pectoral breast reconstructions and can
result in significant pain-relief procedure with optimal aesthetical outcomes.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE IV: This journal requires that authors assign a level of
evidence to each article. For a full description of these Evidence-Based
Medicine ratings, please refer to the Table of Contents or the online
Instructions to Authors www.springer.com/00266 .
BACKGROUND: The management of cystic brain metastases remains challenging, with
high recurrence rates following treatment with resection and/or stereotactic
radiosurgery (SRS). Tumor resection and adjuvant radiation provide superior
outcomes in comparison to those for each therapy alone, but large cystic tumor
en bloc removal is difficult. Cyst aspiration can be used to decrease the
radiation target volume, enabling safer delivery of a therapeutic radiation dose
with improved local tumor control. However, cysts can rapidly recur following
aspiration. Herein, the authors present a case in which cyst aspiration,
radiation, and resection were combined within a single procedure.
OBSERVATIONS: During a single anesthesia episode, a 70-year-old female underwent
stereotactic cyst aspiration, single-fraction SRS, and resection of a 3.7-cm
cystic temporal lobe breast metastasis. The lesion volume exceeded 40 cm3 before
cyst aspiration, decreasing by 62.5% afterward.
LESSONS: Definitive management of large cystic brain metastases including
aspiration, radiation, and resection is feasible under a single anesthesia
session. This approach, compared to traditional management, could help minimize
challenges associated with large cystic lesions, including recurrence and/or
radiation necrosis. https://thejns.org/doi/10.3171/CASE24357.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is the most common form of cancer in women. Adult
weight gain and modifiable health behaviors, including smoking, alcohol intake,
and lack of physical activity, are well-known risk factors. Most weight gain in
women occurs between the ages of 18 and 35 years. Digital interventions have the
potential to address logistical challenges that arise in reaching women in this
age range. We designed a digital intervention targeting weight gain prevention
and other modifiable health behaviors for young women at increased risk of
breast cancer. Women aged 18 to 35 years were recruited to this single-arm
intervention study over 2 months to test the acceptability and usability of the
intervention, which comprised a group welcome event held via videoconferencing,
app, and private Facebook group.
OBJECTIVE: This nested qualitative substudy explored women's views and
experiences of being part of the digital health intervention to inform future
intervention development for a feasibility study.
METHODS: A total of 20 women aged 23 to 35 years who were at increased risk of
breast cancer were interviewed via telephone within 1 month after completing the
intervention, between February 2023 and March 2023. The women were asked about
their experiences of the digital intervention and the extent to which it may
have influenced their health behaviors. Data were analyzed thematically and
organized using the framework approach.
RESULTS: The interviews lasted for a median of 37 (IQR 30-46) minutes. Overall,
the women perceived the digital health intervention comprising education,
tracking, and support to be acceptable for weight gain prevention. In total, 4
themes were generated. A "missed opportunity" in breast cancer prevention
services encompasses the lack of services that currently exist for young women
at increased risk of breast cancer. The pros and cons of being part of a
community encompasses the divergent views that the women had regarding engaging
with other women at increased risk. The importance of an interactive app focuses
on features that the women would want from the app to promote engagement with
the intervention. The different wants and needs of different age groups
highlights that an intervention such as this one would need to be customizable
to suit the needs of women at different life stages.
CONCLUSIONS: There is an unmet need in prevention services for young women aged
18 to 35 years at increased risk of breast cancer. The women perceived the app
to be an acceptable intervention for weight gain prevention but emphasized that
the intervention would need to be customizable to meet the needs of different
age groups within the group of women aged 18 to 35 years. The digital
intervention could be a scalable behavior change strategy for UK family history
clinics.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer (BC) remains a significant health burden globally,
with high incidence and mortality rates, particularly in Nigeria. Chemotherapy,
a common treatment modality for BC, often leads to various physical and
psychological side effects, impacting patients' quality of life. Despite the
growing use of mobile health (mHealth) interventions to provide
psychoeducational support, there is a paucity of evidence regarding their
feasibility and acceptability among Nigerian women with BC.
OBJECTIVE: To develop and investigate the feasibility and acceptability of a
mHealth psychoeducational intervention (mPEI) named the ChEmo Nurse Breast
cancer Application (CENBA) programme.
METHODS: A multi-centre, assessor-blinded, parallel-group pilot randomised
controlled trial (RCT) was conducted at Lagos State University Teaching Hospital
(LASUTH) and Lagos University Teaching Hospital (LUTH). Thirty women newly
diagnosed with BC and undergoing chemotherapy were randomly assigned to an
intervention or a control group. The intervention group received the CENBA
programme, which included BC education, coping skills training, a discussion
forum, and nurse-led consultations, delivered via a mobile application and phone
calls over six weeks. The control group received standard care. Feasibility was
assessed through consent, attrition, and completion rates, while acceptability
was explored via qualitative interviews.
RESULTS: The completion rate was 93.3%. Qualitative data indicated that
participants found the intervention beneficial, particularly appreciating the
educational content and the emotional support provided through the discussion
forum and nurse consultations.
CONCLUSION: The CENBA programme was perceived as a feasible and acceptable
mHealth intervention for providing psychoeducational support to Nigerian women
with BC undergoing chemotherapy. These findings suggest that the CENBA programme
could be a valuable tool in addressing the psychoeducational needs of this
population, warranting further investigation in a full-scale RCT.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: This manuscript reports a feasibility study preceding the
full trial, which was registered with the United States Clinical Trials registry
(number NCT05489354).
BACKGROUND: The breast neuroendocrine neoplasms (NENs) represent a heterogeneous
group of tumors and account for less than 1% of all NENs. The 5th edition of the
WHO Classification of Breast Tumors in 2019 introduced a more stringent
definition for breast NENs including neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) (G1, G2) and
neuroendocrine carcinomas (NECs) (small cell carcinoma, large cell
neuroendocrine carcinoma). While the diagnostic criteria and treatment of breast
NENs still have some unsolved issues.
OBJECTIVE: We aim to discuss the diagnosis, treatment progress, existing
problems, and future development direction of breast NENs.
METHODS: We provide a comprehensive review and evaluation of the diagnostic
criteria, pathological features, utilization of immunohistochemical markers,
molecular characteristics, pathogenesis, clinical significance, treatment
options for breast NENs.
RESULTS: (1) Under the new definition, "pure" breast NENs are extremely rare.
(2) Breast NETs are graded according to Nottingham grading System. Grading
criteria utilized in other systems for NENs, such as mitotic count, ki67
proliferation index, and necrosis, have not been applied to breast NENs. (3) The
WHO has not yet acknowledged the existence of NET G3 clearly. (4) The expression
of NE markers may differ in breast NECs. (5) The treatment of breast NENs is
still based on IBCs-NST, and without any difference from invasive carcinoma with
NE features. (6) The prognosis of breast NENs remains unclear, while the
prognosis for NECs is significantly poorer than invasive breast carcinomas of no
special type (IBCs-NST) has been confirmed.
CONCLUSION: Strict adherence to criteria is the key to correctly diagnose breast
NENs with the exclusion of metastasis from other sites. Further exploration is
required to determine the tissue origin of breast NENs and understand the
pathogenesis. Efforts are still needed to establish unified diagnostic criteria
and a unique diagnosis and treatment consensus for breast NENs.
BACKGROUND: Datopotamab deruxtecan (Dato-DXd), is a humanized anti-TROP2 IgG1
monoclonal antibody linked to a potent topoisomerase I inhibitor payload (DXd).
Dato-DXd has already shown antitumor activity in breast cancer; however, the
determinants of response, including the importance of TROP2 expression, remain
unclear. We tested the activity of Dato-DXd in a panel of breast cancer
patient-derived xenografts (BCXs) varying in TROP2 expression.
METHODS: The antitumor activity of Dato-DXd and isotype-control-DXd (IgG-DXd)
was assessed against 11 BCXs varying in TROP2 expression, 10 representing tumors
post-neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Pharmacodynamic effects were assessed at 24 and
72 hours. The effects of TROP2 expression on Dato-DXd activity was assessed in
vitro and in vivo using viral overexpression in BCX-derived cell lines.
RESULTS: Models differed in their sensitivity to both Dato-DXd and IgG-DXd.
Dato-DXd (10 mg/kg) led to objective response in 4 (36%) models and
statistically significant prolongation of event-free survival (EFS) in 8 (73%)
models while IgG-DXd (10 mg/kg) led to response in 1 (9%) and prolonged EFS in 3
(27%) models. TROP2 RNA and protein was significantly higher in
Dato-DXd-sensitive models. In isogenic cell lines derived from
Dato-DXd-resistant BCXs, overexpression of TROP2 conferred Dato-DXd antitumor
activity in vitro and in vivo. Dato-DXd increased γH2AX and phospho-KAP1 in the
2 Dato-DXd-sensitive BCXs but not in a Dato-DXd-resistant BCX. In
Dato-DXd-sensitive models, antitumor activity was enhanced in combination with
PARP inhibitor, olaparib.
CONCLUSION: Dato-DXd is active in breast cancer models. Dato-DXd has TROP2
dependent and independent mediators of activity; however, high TROP2 expression
enhances Dato-DXd antitumor activity.
BACKGROUND: Whether carriers of BRCA1 or BRCA2 (BRCA1/2) pathogenic variants
(PVs) have increased risks of childhood, adolescent, and young adult (CAYA)
cancers is controversial. We aimed to evaluate this risk and to inform clinical
care of young BRCA1/2 PV carriers and genetic testing for CAYA cancer patients.
METHODS: Using data from 47,117 individuals from 3,086 BRCA1/2 families, we
conducted pedigree analysis to estimate relative risks (RRs) for cancers
diagnosed before age 30.
RESULTS: Our data included 274 cancers diagnosed before age 30: 139 breast
cancers, 10 ovarian cancers, and 125 non-breast non-ovarian cancers.
Associations for breast cancer in young adulthood (20-29 years) were found with
RRs of 11.4 (95% CI: 5.5, 23.7) and 5.2 (95% CI: 1.6, 17.7) for BRCA1 and BRCA2
PV carriers, respectively. No association was found for any other investigated
CAYA cancer, nor for all non-breast non-ovarian cancers combined: the RRs were
0.4 (95% CI: 0.1, 1.4) and 1.4 (95% CI: 0.7, 3.0) in BRCA1 or BRCA2 PV carriers,
respectively.
CONCLUSION: We found no evidence that BRCA1/2 PV carriers have an increased CAYA
cancer risk aside from breast cancer in women in their 20's. Our results, along
with a critical evaluation of previous germline sequencing studies, suggest that
the childhood and adolescent cancer risk conferred by BRCA1/2 PV would be low
(ie, RR < 2) if it existed. Our findings do not support PV testing for offspring
of BRCA1/2 PV carriers at ages <18 years, nor for conducting BRCA1/2 PV testing
for childhood and adolescent cancer patients.
BACKGROUND: Modified Radical Mastectomy is associated with significant acute
postoperative pain. If this pain is not managed properly most patients will
develop chronic post-mastectomy pain, which reduces quality of life. Pectoralis
(PECS) block is effective in reducing pain and the consumption of analgesia in
the post-operative period. The objective was to compare mean post-operative pain
with or without pectoral (PECS) block in females undergoing modified radical
mastectomy under general anaesthesia.
METHODS: A randomized controlled trial was done in the Department of General
Surgery at Pakistan Institute of Medical Sciences, Islamabad. Patients who
fulfilled the inclusion criteria and underwent modified radical mastectomy were
included in the study. A total of 60 patients, were randomly divided into two
equal groups, the PEC group and without PEC group. After surgery, patients were
shifted to the postoperative care unit and were assessed for postoperative pain
after 6 and 12 hours. Data was collected and descriptive analysis was done using
SPSS version 22.
RESULTS: The mean age and BMI of the patients was 51.52±10.29 years and
24.1±3.94 kg/m2, respectively. Among patients from the PEC group, the mean
post-op pain after the 6 hours was 2.13±0.571 while in the without PEC group,
the mean post-op pain was 2.67±1.093 (p-value=0.021). Similarly, in patients
from the PEC group, the mean post-op pain after the 12 hours was 1.20±0.407
while in the without PEC group, the mean post-op pain was 1.63±0.615
(p-value=0.002).
CONCLUSIONS: Post-operative pain with PEC block showed significantly better
control as compared to the patients without PEC block group in females
undergoing modified radical mastectomy under general anaesthesia.
BACKGROUND: Few studies have been conducted on breast cancer despite its high
burden in our context. Therefore, this study aimed to: (1) specify the
sociodemographic and clinical characteristics of breast cancer; and (2)
determine the factors associated with breast cancer survival at Gabriel Touré
University Hospital (CHU).
METHODS: This was a retrospective cohort study conducted at CHU Gabriel Touré
between January 1st2018 and 31st, December 2022. Histologically confirmed cases
of breast cancer were included and divided into three anatomoclinical groups
(non-T4 tumor [NT4], locally advanced cancer [LAC] and inflammatory breast
cancer [IBC]). We used Pearson's Chi-square or Fisher's Exact tests to compare
proportions. The frequency distributions using density plots were constructed
for the three breast types. They were compared using the Kruskal Wallis
statistic. Kaplan-Meier curves were estimated for the survival analysis and Cox
regression was used to identify factors associated with breast cancer survival.
Adjusted hazard ratios (AHRs) and their 95% confidence intervals (95% CIs) were
computed.
RESULTS: A total of 255 cases of breast cancer were included in this study. The
mean age was 46.9 years old. Whatever the anatomoclinical type, the density plot
curve peaked before the age 40. NT4 and LAC were more frequently observed on the
right breast, while IBC occurred on the left breast (p < 0.001). Comorbidity
rates were comparable between the three groups. The median survival time was 9
months, and the overall 5-year survival rate was < 40%. Infertility history and
IBC had a significant influence on survival, with AHRs of 1,63 [1,01 - 2,63] and
1,52 [1,04 - 2,22] respectively.
CONCLUSION: Breast cancer at Gabriel Touré University Hospital is characterized
by an early onset and a poor prognosis, suggesting that particular emphasis
should be placed on early diagnosis and the quality of management.
BACKGROUND: Native Hawaiian and Pacific Islander (NHPI) women experience
significant disparities in breast cancer treatment and outcomes, including lower
rates of postmastectomy reconstruction, higher refusal rates of radiation
therapy, and delays in surgical care. These disparities contribute to poorer
survival and increased complications compared to other racial/ethnic groups.
This systematic review and meta-analysis aim to quantify these disparities and
assess their impact on breast cancer outcomes in NHPI women.
METHODS: A comprehensive search of PubMed, Scopus, and Embase databases was
conducted to identify studies reporting on breast cancer surgery,
reconstruction, radiation therapy refusal, and surgical delays for NHPI women.
Thirteen studies, encompassing a total of 5 546 918 patients, were included, and
meta-analyses were performed to pool odds ratios (OR) and hazard ratios (HR) for
key outcomes using random-effects models. Heterogeneity was assessed using I²
statistics. Thematic analysis was also conducted to explore cultural and
structural factors influencing treatment disparities.
RESULTS: NHPI women had significantly lower odds of receiving postmastectomy
reconstruction compared to non-Hispanic White women (pooled OR = 2.02, 95%
confidence interval [CI]: 1.96-2.08, I² = 99%). Delays in surgical care were
more frequent, with NHPI women being 4.51 times more likely to experience delays
(OR = 4.51, 95% CI: 3.82-5.32, I² = 99%). Radiation therapy refusal was notably
higher, with a pooled hazard ratio of 3.28 (95% CI: 2.99-3.58, I² = 77%)
indicating that NHPI women who refused radiation therapy had more than three
times the risk of mortality compared to those who accepted it. Thematic analysis
revealed that geographic isolation, limited access to specialized care, and
cultural perceptions surrounding cancer treatments, including fear of radiation
due to historical trauma, contributed significantly to treatment disparities.
CONCLUSIONS: Native Hawaiian and Pacific Islander women face considerable
barriers to receiving equitable breast cancer treatment and reconstruction,
resulting in worse outcomes compared to other racial/ethnic groups. Efforts to
address these disparities must focus on improving access to care, reducing
treatment delays, and implementing culturally sensitive interventions. Targeted
policies and healthcare system improvements, especially in geographically
isolated areas, are critical to improving survival and treatment outcomes for
NHPI women.
BACKGROUND: Dual-task function is compromised among individuals with prodromal
Alzheimer's disease (AD) and others at risk of developing AD. While exercise has
been studied as a therapeutic candidate, the activity of social dance might
promote dual-task rehabilitation as well or better than conventional exercise.
OBJECTIVE: Compare effects of social dance versus home exercise on dual-task
function and intervention adherence among individuals with increased risk of
developing AD: survivors of breast cancer (BC) with chemotherapy-induced
neuropathy (CIN).
METHODS: Fifty-two (n = 52) survivors of BC with CIN-related symptoms and
functional deficits were randomized (1:1) to 8 weeks of biweekly physical
activity that took the form of partnered AdapTango dance (20 min) or home
exercise (45 min) (NCT05114005, registered 08/15/2021). Primary outcome:
dual-task function (TUG-Cog counting backward by 3 s). Secondary outcome:
adherence. Exploratory outcomes: participant rating of perceived exertion in
physical versus cognitive domains and cognitive load during dual-task
performance.
RESULTS: Both interventions improved Timed-Up-and-Go with cognitive task
(TUGCog) after 4 weeks (p < 0.001); gains were maintained at 8 weeks of
intervention (p < 0.001) and 1 month follow-up (p < 0.001). The dance
intervention met adherence feasibility criteria for 8 weeks; exercise met
criteria for 4 weeks. The ratio of cognitive to physical exertion was higher for
dance (1 to 1) than exercise (0.8 to 1.0; p < 0.001). Dance, only, was
associated with reduced cognitive load (p = 0.02).
CONCLUSIONS: Among survivors of BC with CIN, small doses of social dance
improved dual-task function comparably to larger doses of home exercise,
possibly due to differences in cognitive engagement.
BACKGROUND: Observational studies provide evidence of correlations between
cancer and the immune system. Previous research has established associations
between immune traits and the propensity for developing certain cancers.
However, a systematic exploration of these connections remains largely
uncharted. Therefore, further investigation is needed to examine the causal
association between cancer and immune cell traits using Mendelian randomization
(MR) approach.
METHODS: We identified genetic instruments for breast cancer (BC), lung cancer
(LC), endometrial cancer (EC), ovarian cancer (OC), prostate cancer (PC), and
their subtype cancers to investigate their potential causal impact on immune
traits. Data on cancer and immune cell traits were obtained from the IEU Open
GWAS project. To assess whether these five cancer types and subtype cancers have
a causal association with immune cell traits, we conducted two-sample MR
analyses. Additionally, we conducted bidirectional MR analyses to examine the
direction of causal relationships and adjusted for potentially related
pleiotropy through multivariable MR analysis.
RESULTS: We have identified several causal relationships between different types
of cancer and immune traits. We found that breast cancer may influence 49 immune
cell traits, endometrial cancer may influence 38, lung cancer may influence 25,
ovarian cancer may influence 19, and prostate cancer may influence 28. Among
these, breast cancer and lung cancer were associated with four common immune
traits: CD25 on IgD- CD38dim, CD25 on sw mem, CD24 on IgD- CD38-, and CD25 on
IgD- CD38-. Lung cancer and prostate cancer shared four immune traits: CD25 on
IgD+ CD24+, CD25 on IgD+ CD38-, CD66b on CD66b++ myeloid cell, DN (CD4-CD8-) AC.
Endometrial cancer and ovarian cancer shared two immune traits: TD DN (CD4-CD8-)
%DN, EM DN (CD4-CD8-) %DN. Breast cancer and endometrial cancer shared one
immune trait: CD20 on IgD- CD38dim. Endometrial cancer and prostate cancer
shared one immune trait: CCR2 on myeloid DC. Lastly, breast cancer, lung cancer,
and prostate cancer shared one immune trait: CD25 on CD24+ CD27+. Additionally,
we identified specific immune traits that may serve as protective or risk
factors for cancers. We found 14 immune traits may influence breast cancer, 9
immune traits may influence endometrial cancer, 22 immune traits may influence
lung cancer, 9 immune traits may influence ovarian cancer, and 14 immune traits
may influence prostate cancer. Among these, breast cancer and prostate cancer
shared three immune traits: HLA DR++ monocyte %monocyte, HLA DR on plasmacytoid
DC, and HLA DR on DC. Lung cancer and ovarian cancer shared one immune trait:
CD62L- monocyte %monocyte. Prostate cancer and endometrial cancer shared one
immune trait: HLA DR on CD33dim HLA DR + CD11b+. Lastly, ovarian cancer and
prostate cancer shared one immune trait: CD3 on resting Treg.
CONCLUSIONS: Our MR study suggests a potential relationship between immune
traits and cancers, particularly highlighting 14 immune traits that are
simultaneously influenced by two or three of five cancer types, while also
indicating that 6 immune traits may simultaneously contribute to the development
of two of the cancers. This elucidation enables us to reveal a significant
involvement of immune traits in cancer progression, providing critical insights
into how immune traits affect cancer susceptibility.
BACKGROUND: Glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) are a family of polysaccharides found
abundantly in the extracellular matrix (ECM) of tissues. Research has indicated
that the dysregulation of ECM, including changes and disruptions in GAGs,
contributes to various cancer hallmarks such as metabolic reprogramming,
persistent growth signals, immunosuppression, angiogenesis, tumor invasion, and
metastasis.
OBJECTIVE: This systematic review aims to evaluate the diagnostic accuracy of
GAGs, including heparan sulfate (HS), chondroitin sulfate (CS), and hyaluronic
acid (HA), in early detection of cancer.
METHOD: Four databases (PubMed, Scopus, EBSCO, and Ovid) were searched for
studies in English within the last 15 years, involving at least 50 human
participants. Using a two-stage process: identification and screening, 11
articles were selected and critically appraised using Critical Appraisal Skills
Programme (CASP) checklists and Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (NOS) appropriate for
each study design.
RESULT: Eleven studies met the inclusion criteria, encompassing various cancers
like renal cell carcinoma (RCC), upper GI cancer (UGI), ovarian cancer, prostate
cancer, breast cancer, lung cancer, colorectal cancer and oral cancer.
Methodological quality was assessed using two established tools, with no studies
exhibiting a high risk of bias. Heparan sulfate levels showed diagnostic
potential in renal cancer with a maximum accuracy of 98.9%, achieving 94.7%
specificity and 100% sensitivity. Chondroitin sulfate disaccharides emerged as a
promising diagnostic marker in ovarian cancer and showed potential as diagnostic
markers in renal cancer. However, there were no statistically significant
differences in urinary chondroitin sulfate levels between patients and controls
in prostate cancer. In breast cancer, hyaluronic acid showed moderate accuracy
(AUC = 0.792) in distinguishing metastatic from non-metastatic disease, and a
composite score incorporating multiple markers, including HA, showed even higher
accuracy (AUC = 0.901) in detecting metastatic breast cancer. HA demonstrated
moderate diagnostic accuracy for UGI cancers. Serum HA levels were significantly
elevated in patients with oral cancer and pleural malignant mesothelioma and
associated with tumor progression in patients with lung cancer. Elevated low
molecular weight form of hyaluronan (~6 k Da HA) levels were found in colorectal
cancer tissues.
CONCLUSION: GAGs hold potential as early cancer detection biomarkers. Further
validation with larger, diverse populations is needed to validate their
diagnostic accuracy and clinical utility.
BACKGROUND: Although high mobility group box protein 1 (HMGB1) has been
researched in relation to cancer in many investigations, a thorough
investigation of its role in pan-cancer has yet to be conducted. With the
objective of bridging this gap, we delved into the functions of HMGB1 in various
tumors.
METHODS: This investigation employed The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and Gene
Expression Omnibus (GEO) databases to examine HMGB1 gene expression differences
and correlation with survival across various human tumors. Then, genetic
alterations of HMGB1 were analyzed by tool cBioPortal, and immune cell
infiltration was assessed. Finally, we gathered clinial samples from 95 patients
with various types of solid tumor and performed somatic mutation analysis using
panel sequencing. This further highlighted the role of HMGB1 in different solid
tumors.
RESULTS: There was a notable elevation of HMGB1 gene expression in tumor tissues
as opposed to non-cancerous tissues across the bulk of tumor types. Elevated
HMGB1 gene expression had a connection with shorter overall survival,
progression-free survival, and disease-free survival in specific tumor types.
Genetic alterations of HMGB1 suggested that the amplifications and mutations of
HMGB1 may impact the prognosis of breast cancer (BRCA) and liver hepatocellular
carcinoma (LIHC). Both BRCA and mesothelioma (MESO) displayed a connection
between the infiltration of cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) and HMGB1 gene
expression. Moreover, HMGB1 co-expression analysis revealed its association with
genes involved in RNA splicing, mRNA processing, and modulation of mRNA
metabolic processes. Additionally, a pathway analysis by use of the Kyoto
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) unveiled that HMGB1 was implicated in
the pathogenic mechanisms of "Hepatitis B," "Viral Carcinogenesis," and
"Hepatocellular Carcinoma." Based on somatic mutation analysis of 95 patients
with different solid tumors, we found that the frequency of HMGB1 mutations was
higher in Liver cancer patients compared to other solid tumors. This finding is
consistent with our in-silico study results. Additionally, we discovered that
the frequency of HMGB1 mutations ranked among the top 20 mutated genes in the 95
patients' data, indicating that HMGB1 plays an important role in the development
and prognosis of various solid tumors.
CONCLUSION: This pan-cancer study of HMGB1 underscores its potential as a
signature marker and target for the management of various tumor types.
BACKGROUND: A standard treatment recommendation for third-line and subsequent
treatments for advanced HER2-positive breast cancer is still missing, especially
for low HER2 expression. Nevertheless, there is evidence that these patients
might benefits from antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) treatment. Therefore, this
study aimed to evaluate the clinical efficacy, safety, and factors affecting
efficacy of Disitamab Vedotin (RC48) for treating HER2-positive and HER2-low
metastatic breast cancer (MBC) in the real-world setting.
METHODS: A retrospective study at five clinical sites was conducted in China,
enrolling MBC patients treated with RC48 from July 01, 2021 and May 31, 2023.
Patient demographics, treatment patterns, and adverse events (AEs) were recorded
and analyzed.
RESULTS: A total of 154 patients were included: 104 (67.53%) patients with
HER2-positive and 50 (32.47%) patients with HER2-low MBC. The median
progression-free survival (mPFS) was 5.06 months. The objective response rate
(ORR) and disease control rate (DCR) were 36.36% and 68.83%, respectively.
HER2-positive patients exhibited a mPFS of 5.93 and an ORR of 41.35%. In
contrast, patients with low-HER2 had a mPFS of 4.28 months and an ORR of 26.00%.
The most common AEs included neutropenia (54.55%), increased AST (53.25%),
leukopenia (51.95%), and fatigue (43.51%), mostly graded mild to moderate (grade
1-2).
CONCLUSIONS: This extensive study in China demonstrated that RC48 has excellent
therapeutic potential for both HER2-positive and HER2-low MBC with a favorable
safety profile. The study also suggests that combination therapy significantly
boosts efficacy beyond monotherapy, indicating a promising avenue for future ADC
development.
BACKGROUND: Lung adenocarcinoma is the most common type of lung cancer,
accounting for approximately 40% of all lung cancer cases, and has the highest
incidence among lung cancer subtypes. Recent studies have suggested that long
non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) play a crucial role in the initiation and progression
of lung adenocarcinoma.
METHODS: Based on integrative analysis through databases, we screened Long
intergenic non-protein coding RNA 00839 (LINC00839) as one of the most highly
upregulated lncRNAs in lung adenocarcinoma. In vitro and in vivo experiments
demonstrated that LINC00839 promotes lung adenocarcinoma proliferation,
migration, and invasion and that it is present in exosomes secreted by lung
adenocarcinoma cells.
RESULTS: In the cytoplasm, LINC00839 regulates the Toll-like receptor 4
(TLR4)/NF-κB signaling pathway by acting as a molecular sponge of miR-17-5p,
thereby influencing the biological behavior of lung adenocarcinoma cells.
LINC00839 binds to Polypyrimidine tract binding protein 1 (PTBP1) in the nucleus
to regulate the nuclear translocation of NF-κB p65 molecules and, consequently,
the transcription of downstream molecules.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study confirmed that LINC00839 promotes the biological
progression of lung adenocarcinoma by performing dual roles in the cytoplasm and
nucleus to co-regulate the NF-κB signaling pathway.
BACKGROUND: S-phase kinase-associated protein 2 (SKP2) is a typical oncogene
aberrantly overexpressing in a variety of cancer types, but it remains elusive
whether SKP2 regulates the antitumor immunity of triple-negative breast cancer.
METHODS: The efficacy of anti-PD-1 was evaluated in the orthotopic xenografts of
immunocompetent mice models. The infiltration of cytotoxic T cells in tumor
microenvironment(TME) were assessed by immunofluorescence staining. The levels
of pro-inflammatory chemokines were analyzed by ELISA. The protein interaction
was analyzed by co-immunoprecipitation and GST pull-down. The genomic
instability was analyzed by fluorescent microscopy.
RESULTS: SKP2 inhibition significantly improved the antitumor efficacy of immune
checkpoint blockade (ICB). Furthermore, SKP2 inhibition activated the cGAS/STING
signal pathway and induced the secretion of pro-inflammatory chemokines, thereby
promoting cytotoxic T cell infiltration. Additionally, we identified CDC6, a DNA
replication licensing factor as a novel substrate of SKP2 in addition to CDT1.
SKP2 induced protein degradation of CDC6 and CDT1 through the
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Conversely, SKP2 inhibition elevated CDC6 and CDT1
protein levels, which caused DNA aberrant replication, DNA damage and genomic
instability, thereby resulting in the accumulation of cytosolic DNA, activating
cGAS/STING signaling pathway and improving antitumor immunity.
CONCLUSION: SKP2 may be used as an effective therapeutic target to enable ICB
antitumor immunotherapy.
SOCIAL MEDIA: Peng et al. found that SKP2 inhibition improved the antitumor
immunotherapy by activating tumor cell-intrinsic immunity, thereby providing
evidences that SKP2 may be used as an effective therapeutic target to enable ICB
antitumor immunotherapy.
BACKGROUND: Budd-Chiari syndrome is a rare and severe vascular liver disease. We
presented patient with fulminant liver failure secondary to leiomyosarcoma of
the IVC and thrombosis.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 44-year-old female presented with fulminant liver failure
secondary to inferior vena cava (IVC) thrombosis. Contrast-enhanced computed
tomography subsequently revealed a thrombus within the IVC, extending cranially
to the right atrium and caudally to the renal veins. The patient's condition,
characterized by early comatose symptoms, necessitated surgical intervention.
Under extracorporeal circulation, a right atriotomy with thrombus lesion removal
and descending thrombectomy of the IVC was performed. Hepatic congestion
resolved after the thrombus was removed. A pathological examination of the
excised thrombus revealed the presence of high-grade leiomyosarcoma.
CONCLUSIONS: In cases where a thrombus extends from the IVC to the right atrium,
urgent surgical intervention with extracorporeal circulation should be
considered.
BACKGROUND: The establishment of apicobasal polarity in epithelial cells is of
critical importance in morphogenesis of mammary gland and other secretive gland
tissues. The demise of the polarity is a critical step in early stages of
tumorigenesis such as in breast ductal carcinoma in situ. The underlying
molecular mechanism thus warrants in-depth investigations.
RESULTS: Protein kinase C isoform ζ (PKCζ), which is highly expressed in breast
cancer cells, accumulates in the nuclei of human mammary epithelial cells
overexpressing human rhomboid family-1 (RHBDF1), an endoplasmic reticulum
membrane protein. Nuclear translocation of PKCζ results in the failure of the
formation of the cytosolic apicobasal polarity complex Par, of which PKCζ is an
essential component. Additionally, enhanced nuclear translocation of PKCζ is
accompanied by an inhibition of the expression of cell tight junction and
adherens junction proteins and an increase of cell mobility. Mechanistically,
RHBDF1 is able to interact with importin β1 and PKCζ and promote PKCζ
phosphorylation. Consistently, treatment of RHBDF1-overexpressing cells with an
inhibitor of PKCζ phosphorylation leads to restoration of apicobasal polarity
and cell-cell junctions, as well as suppressed cell mobility.
CONCLUSIONS: RHBDF1-facilitated nuclear translocation of PKCζ is critically
responsible for the dismantlement of epithelial cell apicobasal polarity, and
thus may serve as a target in the development of therapeutic approaches against
early stages of breast cancer.
BACKGROUND: Conflicting studies have investigated the association between
obesity, metabolic and bariatric surgery (MBS), and cancer.
OBJECTIVES: Our study aimed at elucidating the trends in cancer incidence that
are related to obesity and weight loss managed through MBSs, like Colo-rectal,
breast, uterine, and esophageal cancer.
SETTING: We conducted a search using PubMed, Embase, and the Cochrane Library
electronic databases through May 2020.
METHODS: A systematic review and meta-analysis were conducted according to the
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis (PRISMA)
statement.
RESULTS: MBS procedures surveyed included sleeve gastrectomy, gastric band,
gastric bypass, gastric balloon, and banded gastroplasty/silastic ring
gastroplasty. The initial search found 11,789 potential studies. After data
extraction and filtering, 21 were included in the final analysis. Overall, the
calculated risk of cancer was reduced after MBS in comparison to the patients
suffering from obesity who were treated nonoperatively (mean effect size of
-.33). It was also found as a protective factor against colorectal cancer (mean
E.S. -.28), uterine cancer (mean E.S. -.42), breast cancer (mean E.S. -.37), and
esophageal cancer (mean E.S. -.23). Other cancers, such as liver, pancreatic,
and skin, did not show a significant change even though a trend was seen.
CONCLUSIONS: According to the data retrieved from patients who underwent MBS
compared to nonoperated patients suffering from obesity, the overall risk for
malignancy was lower in the MBS group. Additional information collected in this
study revealed the behavior of specific types of cancer in response to induced
weight loss by operative means. The benefit of surgery in patients suffering
from obesity is not restricted to the improvement of obesity morbidity alone.
BACKGROUND: Mammographic density (MD) is a well-established risk factor for
breast cancer. Air pollution is a major public health concern and a recognized
carcinogen. We aim to investigate the association between MD and exposure to
specific air pollutants (SO2, CO, NO, NO2, NOx, PM2.5, PM10, and O3) in
premenopausal females.
METHODS: This cross-sectional study, carried out in Spain, included 769
participants who attended their gynecological examinations. Hourly
concentrations of the pollutants were extracted from the Air Quality Monitoring
System of Madrid City over a 3-year period. Individual long-term exposure to
pollutants was assessed by geocoding residential addresses and monitoring
stations, and applying ordinary kriging to the 3-year annual mean concentrations
of each pollutant to interpolate the surface of Madrid. This exposure variable
was categorized into quartiles. In a first analysis, we used multiple linear
regression models with the log-transformed percent MD as a continuous variable.
In a second analysis, we used MD as a dichotomous variable ("high" density (MD >
50%) vs. "low" density (MD ≤ 50%)) and applied multiple logistic regression
models to estimate odds ratios (ORs). We also analyzed the correlation among the
pollutants, and performed a principal component analysis (PCA) to reduce the
dimensionality of this set of eight correlated pollutants into a smaller set of
uncorrelated variables (principal components (PCs)). Finally, the initial
analyses were applied to the PCs to detect underlying patterns of emission
sources.
RESULTS: The first analysis detected no association between MD and exposure to
any of the pollutants. The second analysis showed non-statistically significant
increased risks (ORQ4; IC95%) of high MD were detected in women with higher
exposure to SO2 (1.50; 0.90-2.48), and PM2.5 (1.27; 0.77-2.10). In contrast,
non-significant ORs < 1 were found in all exposure quartiles for NO (ORQ2 =
0.72, ORQ3 = 0.68, ORQ4 = 0.78), and PM10 (ORQ2 = 0.69, ORQ3 = 0.82, ORQ4 =
0.72). PCA identified two PCs (PC1: "traffic pollution" and PC2: "natural
pollution"), and no association was detected between MD and proximity to these
two PCs.
CONCLUSIONS: In general, our results show a lack of association between
residential exposure to specific air pollutants and MD in premenopausal females.
Future research is needed to confirm or refute these findings.
BACKGROUND: Routine mammogram screening is critical for early detection of
breast cancer. However, screening rates are below national targets, with
persistent disparities among sub-populations. The purpose of this trial is to
examine the effectiveness of a multi-component nudge intervention to increase
breast cancer screening among eligible primary care patients.
METHODS: This is a two-phase, multisite, pragmatic cluster randomized clinical
trial. In the first phase, two concurrent trials (trial A, B) will test the
effectiveness of a multi-component nudge intervention that leverages the
electronic health record (EHR) for increasing mammogram screening. The second
phase includes a replication trial at an additional site. In Trial A, primary
care clinics (n = 30) will be randomized 2:1 to a nudge intervention or usual
care. Eligible clinicians and patients within the intervention clinics will
receive the intervention. Patients identified as high-risk for mammogram
non-completion in the intervention arm will be further randomized 1:1 to receive
an intensification nudge. In Trial B, primary care clinicians (n = 82) will be
randomized 1:1 to a nudge intervention or usual care. The primary outcome is
mammogram completion within three months of the eligible visit.
ANALYSIS: Outcomes will be evaluated using generalized estimating equations
(GEE) to address clinic-level clustering. GEE models will also be fit to
evaluate the impact of the intensification nudge on mammogram completion.
CONCLUSION: If successful, this trial provides a blueprint for leveraging
scalable multi-component nudge interventions for clinicians and patients to
improve cancer screening rates.
BACKGROUND: Breast, colorectal, lung and prostate cancers are the most frequent
malignancies in Cyprus. This study estimated the incidence rate and 5-year net
survival (NS) trends for these cancers, by sex, age, and tumor stage at
diagnosis.
METHODS: We analyzed data from the Cyprus Cancer Registry for adults diagnosed
between 2004 and 2017, with follow-up until 2019. Tumor stage was classified
into localized, regional, distant and unknown categories. We estimated the
annual percentage change (APC) in incidence rates using Joinpoint regression. NS
was estimated using flexible parametric models, adjusting for sex, age, stage
and period of diagnosis. Multiple imputation was used to address unknown cancer
stage.
RESULTS: During 2004-2017, the incidence significantly increased for breast and
lung cancer (APC: 1.1 % and 2.6 %, respectively), mainly among the elderly
(70 +). A decreasing trend was identified for prostate cancer only among
individuals aged 80 +. No temporal variations were identified for colorectal
cancer incidence. A positive time trend was identified for localized breast
cancer between 2006 and 2017 (APC: 2.8 %). Conversely, a significant increase
was noted at more advanced stages for lung (APCdistant: 4.1 %) and prostate
(APCregional: 7.6 %) cancers. NS improved for all cancers, ranging between 80 %
and 90 % for regional and all stages of breast cancer, localized colorectal
cancer, and all stages of prostate cancer, surpassing 95 % for localized breast
cancer, localized and regional prostate cancer.
CONCLUSION: The study observed increased (breast and lung) or stable (colorectal
and prostate) cancer incidence and substantial improvements in 5-years NS trends
for all cancer types, despite differences by sex and stage. Efforts should be
intensified to reduce incidence by addressing cancer risk factors, and to
improve survival by implementing and increasing the uptake of screening
programs.
BACKGROUND: The integration of multi-omics data through deep learning has
greatly improved cancer subtype classification, particularly in feature learning
and multi-omics data integration. However, key challenges remain in embedding
sample structure information into the feature space and designing flexible
integration strategies.
RESULTS: We propose MoAGL-SA, an adaptive multi-omics integration method based
on graph learning and self-attention, to address these challenges. First,
patient relationship graphs are generated from each omics dataset using graph
learning. Next, three-layer graph convolutional networks are employed to extract
omic-specific graph embeddings. Self-attention is then used to focus on the most
relevant omics, adaptively assigning weights to different graph embeddings for
multi-omics integration. Finally, cancer subtypes are classified using a softmax
classifier.
CONCLUSIONS: Experimental results show that MoAGL-SA outperforms several popular
algorithms on datasets for breast invasive carcinoma, kidney renal papillary
cell carcinoma, and kidney renal clear cell carcinoma. Additionally, MoAGL-SA
successfully identifies key biomarkers for breast invasive carcinoma.
BACKGROUND: Recent advancements in therapeutics for BRCA-associated breast
cancer have changed indications for germline genetic testing. This study
investigated whether Medicaid plans cover National Comprehensive Cancer Network
(NCCN)-concordant and/or American Society for Clinical Oncology/Society for
Surgical Oncology (ASCO/SSO)-concordant BRCA germline testing for patients with
breast cancer.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Publicly available, complete, and original state Medicaid
plans for all 50 states were reviewed to determine coverage criteria for BRCA
genetic testing for patients with breast cancer and clinical cancer geneticist
consultation. States were categorized into discrete categories on the basis of
the policy language.
RESULTS: Only 58% (n = 29) of state Medicaid plans explicitly or implicitly
cover NCCN-concordant BRCA testing. Of the remaining 21 states, 85% reference
out-of-date NCCN criteria, suggesting delayed uptake of new guidelines. Only one
state (Colorado) covers ASCO/SSO guideline-concordant BRCA testing for newly
diagnosed breast cancer. Nearly all state Medicaid plans (98%, n = 49) cover
clinical cancer genetics consultation.
DISCUSSION: Significant variation in Medicaid coverage for BRCA germline
mutation testing may inadvertently exclude socially and economically
marginalized populations from the emerging standard of care. Policy language
should consider explicit mention of coverage in accordance with NCCN guidelines.
BACKGROUND: This systematic review aimed to examine changes in health-related
quality of life (HRQoL) in women with breast cancer from pre-to post surgery,
comparing mastectomy (M), mastectomy with breast reconstruction (MBR), and
breast conserving surgery (BCS).
METHODS: We included English-language randomised and non-randomised controlled
trials and observational studies involving adult women, pre-operatively
diagnosed with breast cancer (excluding metastatic cases). Studies needed to
assess HRQoL pre- and post-surgery using validated questionnaires and include
women undergoing M, MBR, and BCS. Searches in six electronic databases were
supplemented by checking reference lists. Two independent researchers conducted
the article selection, data extraction, and quality assessment. Narrative
synthesis included categorisation of HRQoL in physical and psychosocial HRQoL
domains with calculation and interpretation of minimally important differences
BACKGROUND: Depression weakens antitumor immunity, yet the underlying mechanisms
linking depression and tumor growth remain unclear. This study examines the
influence of depression on the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis,
immunological function, and effectiveness of immunotherapy in triple-negative
breast cancer (TNBC) patients.
METHODS: A mouse model of comorbid TNBC and depression was established via
chronic restraint stress (CRS) and 4T1 tumor transplantation. A programmed cell
death ligand 1 (PD-L1) inhibitor was used to manage mice with TNBC, and the
ability of metyrapone to reverse the immune system changes induced by HPA axis
activation in depression was evaluated. Mouse peripheral blood was used to
measure HPA axis activity, immune cell numbers and cytokine levels.
RESULTS: Depression activates the HPA axis, leading to increased levels of
glucocorticoids. Depression led to an increase in the B-cell number and a
reduction in the CD4+ T-cell and CD8+ T-cell numbers, without a statistically
significant difference in the regulatory T (Treg) cell number. Furthermore,
depression increased the levels of the cytokines interferon-gamma (IFN-γ),
interleukin (IL)-1β, IL-4, IL-6, IL-8, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α while
decreasing the levels of IL-2 and IL-10. Similar results were observed in the
context of PD-L1 inhibitor therapy. The depressed mice presented an increased
tumor burden and a poor response to the PD-L1 inhibitor. The application of
metyrapone during PD-L1 inhibitor treatment resulted in partial restoration of
these depression-related alterations.
CONCLUSIONS: Depression reduces the effectiveness of PD-L1 inhibitors by
altering the number of immune cells and the levels of cytokines through
activation of the HPA axis.
TRANSLATIONAL RELEVANCE: Depression is common in breast cancer patients and is
associated with reduced antitumor immunity. There is limited knowledge regarding
the specific mechanisms through which depression impairs antitumor immunity.
Immunotherapy, which promotes the restoration of antitumor immunity, represents
a promising treatment strategy for TNBC patients. However, the efficacy of
immunotherapy can be compromised by depressive symptoms and the administration
of glucocorticoids during treatment. It is still uncertain whether increasing
glucocorticoid levels can reduce the efficacy of immunotherapy in patients with
depression. The potential benefits of combining immunotherapy with
glucocorticoid inhibitors compared with immunotherapy alone need to be evaluated
for TNBC patients with concurrent depressive symptoms. Therefore, further
clarification of the specific mechanisms by which depression impairs antitumor
immunity is needed to inform future optimization of immunotherapy strategies.
BACKGROUND: Recent healthcare advancements highlight the potential of Artificial
Intelligence (AI) - and especially, among its subfields, Machine Learning (ML) -
in enhancing Breast Cancer (BC) clinical care, leading to improved patient
outcomes and increased radiologists' efficiency. While medical imaging
techniques have significantly contributed to BC detection and diagnosis, their
synergy with AI algorithms has consistently demonstrated superior diagnostic
accuracy, reduced False Positives (FPs), and enabled personalized treatment
strategies. Despite the burgeoning enthusiasm for leveraging AI for early and
effective BC clinical care, its widespread integration into clinical practice is
yet to be realized, and the evaluation of AI-based health technologies in terms
of health and economic outcomes remains an ongoing endeavor.
OBJECTIVES: This scoping review aims to investigate AI (and especially ML)
applications that have been implemented and evaluated across diverse clinical
tasks or decisions in breast imaging and to explore the current state of
evidence concerning the assessment of AI-based technologies for BC clinical care
within the context of Health Technology Assessment (HTA).
METHODS: We conducted a systematic literature search following the Preferred
Reporting Items for Systematic review and Meta-Analysis Protocols (PRISMA-P)
checklist in PubMed and Scopus to identify relevant studies on AI (and
particularly ML) applications in BC detection and diagnosis. We limited our
search to studies published from January 2015 to October 2023. The Minimum
Information about CLinical Artificial Intelligence Modeling (MI-CLAIM) checklist
was used to assess the quality of AI algorithms development, evaluation, and
reporting quality in the reviewed articles. The HTA Core Model® was also used to
analyze the comprehensiveness, robustness, and reliability of the reported
results and evidence in AI-systems' evaluations to ensure rigorous assessment of
AI systems' utility and cost-effectiveness in clinical practice.
RESULTS: Of the 1652 initially identified articles, 104 were deemed eligible for
inclusion in the review. Most studies examined the clinical effectiveness of
AI-based systems (78.84%, n= 82), with one study focusing on safety in clinical
settings, and 13.46% (n=14) focusing on patients' benefits. Of the studies,
31.73% (n=33) were ethically approved to be carried out in clinical practice,
whereas 25% (n=26) evaluated AI systems legally approved for clinical use.
Notably, none of the studies addressed the organizational implications of AI
systems in clinical practice. Of the 104 studies, only two of them focused on
cost-effectiveness analysis, and were analyzed separately. The average
percentage scores for the first 102 AI-based studies' quality assessment based
on the MI-CLAIM checklist criteria were 84.12%, 83.92%, 83.98%, 74.51%, and
14.7% for study design, data and optimization, model performance, model
examination, and reproducibility, respectively. Notably, 20.59% (n=21) of these
studies relied on large-scale representative real-world breast screening
datasets, with only 10.78% (n =11) studies demonstrating the robustness and
generalizability of the evaluated AI systems.
CONCLUSION: In bridging the gap between cutting-edge developments and seamless
integration of AI systems into clinical workflows, persistent challenges
encompass data quality and availability, ethical and legal considerations,
robustness and trustworthiness, scalability, and alignment with existing
radiologists' workflow. These hurdles impede the synthesis of comprehensive,
robust, and reliable evidence to substantiate these systems' clinical utility,
relevance, and cost-effectiveness in real-world clinical workflows.
Consequently, evaluating AI-based health technologies through established HTA
methodologies becomes complicated. We also highlight potential significant
influences on AI systems' effectiveness of various factors, such as operational
dynamics, organizational structure, the application context of AI systems, and
practices in breast screening or examination reading of AI support tools in
radiology. Furthermore, we emphasize substantial reciprocal influences on
decision-making processes between AI systems and radiologists. Thus, we advocate
for an adapted assessment framework specifically designed to address these
potential influences on AI systems' effectiveness, mainly addressing
system-level transformative implications for AI systems rather than focusing
solely on technical performance and task-level evaluations.
BACKGROUND: The combination of cyclin-dependent kinase 4 and 6 inhibitors
(CDK4/6i) with endocrine therapy (ET) is the standard of care for patients with
hormone receptor-positive/human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-negative
(HR+/HER2-) advanced breast cancer (aBC). While the efficacy and safety profiles
of CDK4/6i and ET have been extensively evaluated in phase II and III trials
worldwide, it remains unclear whether the response to CDK4/6i and toxicity
profile vary among Asian and non-Asian patients. Therefore, we aimed to assess
the treatment efficacy of ET with and without CDK4/6i by comparing outcomes in
Asian and non-Asian subgroups included in these clinical trials. In addition, we
evaluated the toxicity profiles of the treatments by estimating the risk of
treatment-related adverse events (AEs).
METHODS: We conducted a meta-analysis including the most recent randomized trial
data systematically searched from PubMed, Embase, Web of Science, Cochrane
CENTRAL (from inception to May 31st, 2024) or presented in abstracts or oral
presentations at the ESMO, ASCO, and SABCS international congresses. We included
studies comparing CDK4/6i (palbociclib, ribociclib, abemaciclib,
dalpiciclib) + ET versus placebo + ET. Progression-free survival (PFS) and
overall survival (OS), hazard ratios (HR), and 95 % confidence intervals (CI)
were extracted for the two subgroups of interest. To evaluate the
treatment-related toxicity profiles, we extracted the number of side effects to
estimate the risk of treatment-emergent AEs.
RESULTS: Eleven studies (n = 5129) were included in this meta-analysis. The
addition of CDK4/6i to ET consistently improved PFS in both Asian (HR = 0.52,
95 % CI 0.47-0.60; p < 0.001) and non-Asian (HR = 0.58, 95 % CI 0.52-0.64;
p < 0.001) groups. Similarly, the combination of CDK4/6i + ET led to an OS
improvement in both Asian (HR = 0.75, 95 % CI 0.62-0.91; p = 0.003) and
non-Asian (HR = 0.81, 95 % CI 0.73-0.89; p < 0.001) patients. The risk of
treatment related toxicity was higher in the CDK4/6i + ET arm in both Asian and
non-Asian groups. Interestingly, a numerically higher rate of treatment-related
hematological toxicity was observed in Asian patients, although no significant
interethnic difference was found in the relative risk of these events.
CONCLUSIONS: The combination of CDK4/6i and ET significantly improves PFS and OS
compared to ET alone in both Asian and non-Asian patients with HR+/HER2-aBC.
Although the magnitude of benefit appears to be independent of ethnicity, future
clinical trials should devise a standardized method for stratifying patients by
ethnicity to more effectively assess potential differences in treatment
benefits.
SYSTEMATIC REVIEW REGISTRATION: PROSPERO registration number: CRD42024543217.
BACKGROUND: Risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy (RRSO) effectively prevents
high-grade serous carcinoma (HGSC) in BRCA1/2 germline pathogenic variant (GPV)
carriers. Still, some women develop HGSC after RRSO without pathologic findings.
This study assessed long-term incidence and risk factors for developing HGSC
after RRSO without pathologic findings.
METHODS: BRCA1/2 GPV carriers were selected from Hereditary Breast and Ovarian
cancer in the Netherlands (HEBON) cohort. Follow-up data for HGSC after RRSO
were obtained from the Dutch Nationwide Pathology Databank (PALGA) and confirmed
by histopathological review. Cumulative incidence rates of HGSC were calculated
using Kaplan-Meier analyses. Cox proportional hazards model was used to
calculate hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for factors
associated with an increased risk of HGSC following RRSO without pathologic
findings.
RESULTS: A total of 2519 women were included, with a median follow-up of
13.4 years (range: 0.0-27.6). The 20-years cumulative incidence rate of HGSC was
1.5% (95% CI: 0.0-2.1) for BRCA1 and 0.2% (95% CI: 0.0-1.4) for BRCA2 GPV
carriers. All women who developed HGSC underwent RRSO after the recommended age.
Incomplete embedding of the RRSO specimen (HR: 4.2, 95% CI: 1.4-12.6), higher
age at RRSO (HR per year: 1.1, 95% CI: 1.0-1.1), and carrying a BRCA1 GPV (HR:
12.1, 95% CI: 1.6-91.2) were associated with increased risk of HGSC.
CONCLUSIONS: In BRCA1/2 GPV carriers, long-term incidence of HGSC after RRSO
without pathologic findings was low. Strict adherence to guidelines regarding
timely RRSO followed by complete specimen embedding can further reduce the risk
of HGSC in the years following RRSO.
BACKGROUND: Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-targeted (HER2) therapy
with antibody-drug conjugates has proven effective for patients with HER2-low
breast cancer. However, intratumoral heterogeneity (ITH) poses a great challenge
in identifying HER2-low tumors. ITH signatures were developed by quantifying ITH
to differentiate HER2-positive, -low and -zero breast cancers.
METHODS: This retrospective study included 614 patients from two institutions.
The study was structured into two primary tasks: task 1 was to differentiate
between HER2-positive and -negative tumors, followed by task 2 to differentiate
HER2-low and -zero tumors. Whole-tumor radiomics features and habitat radiomics
features were extracted from MRI to construct the radiomics and ITH signatures.
Multivariable logistic regression analysis was used to determine significant
independent predictors. A combined model integrating significant
clinicopathologic variables, radiomics signature, and ITH signature was
developed for task (1) Subsequently, the better-performing model was established
using the same approach for task (2) The area under the receiver operating
characteristic curve (AUC) was used to assess the performance of each model.
RESULTS: Task 1 comprised 614 patients (training, n = 348; validation, n = 149;
and test cohorts, n = 117). Task 2 encompassed 501 patients (training, n = 283;
validation, n = 122; and test cohorts, n = 96). For task1, the ITH signature
showed outstanding performance, achieving AUCs of 0.81, 0.81, and 0.81 in the
training, validation and test cohorts, respectively. The combined model achieved
improved performance, with AUCs of 0.83, 0.84 and 0.83 across the three cohorts,
respectively. For task2, the ITH signature maintained superior performance, with
AUCs of 0.94, 0.93 and 0.84 across the training, validation and test cohorts,
respectively. Multivariable logistic regression analysis indicated that none of
the clinicopathologic characteristics were retained as predictors associated
with odds of HER2-low tumors.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study developed ITH signatures that quantified ITH using
habitat-based MRI radiomics, achieving outstanding performance in
differentiating HER2-postive and -negative tumors, and further differentiating
HER2-low and -zero breast cancers.
BACKGROUND: Cancer is the second most common cause of death in Germany, and
treatment in certified cancer networks is recommended to ensure high-quality
care. This study sought to (1) determine the percentage of all primary tumors
that might potentially have been treated in certified cancer networks and (2)
assess the development and current state of quality-assured cancer care for all
cancer patients from a locally defined region in Upper Franconia, Germany.
METHODS: This study was a population-centered retrospective cohort analysis
based on data from the Bavarian Cancer Registry (2017-2023). First, we
determined all potentially available cancer network certifications and
calculated the percentage of cancer care that could potentially have been
conducted in certified cancer networks. Second, we considered the certification
status of the involved healthcare providers and analyzed whether or not cancer
care was actually carried out in certified cancer networks.
RESULTS: Overall, 90.1% (62,119/68,973) of all primary tumors, from a total of
63,372 patients, might potentially have been treated in certified cancer
networks. The percentage of patients actually receiving care in certified cancer
center networks was 40.7% for initial diagnosis, 59.0% for surgery, 53.2% for
chemotherapy, and 50.7% for radiotherapy; the weighted mean was 50.3%. The
results thus ranged between 46.9% (2023) and 52.8% (2022). The highest
proportions of patients who received quality-assured treatment in certified
cancer center networks were determined for breast cancer (79.5%), colon cancer
(73.1%), and lymphoma (60.1%); in contrast, the lowest results were shown for
lung cancer (2.7%), anal cancer (0.0%), and mesothelioma (0.0%). Female patients
as well as younger patients were significantly more likely to receive care in
certified care networks compared with their counterparts. In addition, we did
not find a clear trend whether patients in different tumor stages were more or
less likely to receive care in certified care networks.
CONCLUSIONS: We found meaningful differences in the proportion of patients who
received quality-assured treatment in certified cancer center networks.
Following this, patients should receive comprehensive information about
receiving care in certified cancer center networks and consider longer travel
distances, especially for those cancer types without locally available certified
cancer networks.
BACKGROUND: Acute lung injury (ALI) triggers the activation of pulmonary
macrophages, which in turn produce excessive amounts of reactive oxygen species
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer (BC) constitutes a significant public health challenge
in Italy, with a considerable impact on healthcare resources and societal costs.
Despite advancements in diagnostics and therapies, the economic burden of BC
remains substantial, necessitating a comprehensive evaluation to inform
healthcare policy and resource allocation. The aim of this study is to estimate
both direct health costs and social security costs related to BC.
METHODS: This study utilized real-world data from the Italian Health Information
System (HIS) and Local Health Unit (LHU) Umbria 2 HIS databases spanning
2010-2019. Direct health costs, encompassing hospitalizations, outpatient
visits, and drug prescriptions, were assessed alongside social security costs
associated with BC-related work inability. Statistical analyses and
probabilistic models were employed to estimate costs and evaluate trends over
time.
RESULTS: The analysis revealed an annual cost of €273 million for hospital
admissions related to BC in Italy, with metastatic BC (MBC) incurring the
highest average annual cost per patient (€5018). When outpatient visits and drug
consumption were incorporated, the mean annual cost per patient in LHU Umbria 2
rose to €11,380 for MBC. Social security costs, predominantly comprising
disability benefits (DBs), totaled €579 million annually. Overall, the study
estimated the total annual economic impact of BC in Italy to exceed €1 billion,
with social costs representing 50.4% of the total burden.
CONCLUSIONS: This comprehensive assessment underscores the substantial economic
strain imposed by BC in Italy and highlights the need for early detection and
intervention strategies to mitigate costs and enhance patient outcomes. These
findings offer valuable insights into the economic landscape of BC, guiding
policy decisions and resource allocation efforts aimed at optimizing BC
management and alleviating its societal burden.
BACKGROUND: Low skeletal muscle mass and poor muscle quality are associated with
poor outcomes in women with breast cancer. However, gaps exist in our
understanding of prognostic factors for young women (≤ 40 years), as they often
have different body composition than older women. We evaluated pretreatment body
composition measures in young women with breast cancer, including associations
with overall survival (OS) and progression-free survival (PFS).
METHODS: The Young Women's Database at Levine Cancer Institute was queried for
women aged 18 to 40 at diagnosis (2009-2018) of single primary breast cancer (N
= 870); patients with Stage 0 and 4 were excluded. Deceased patients with
pretreatment computed tomography (CT) scans were identified (N = 40) and matched
(1:1) to patients presumed alive by age, diagnosis year, and disease
characteristics. CT-derived body composition measures included skeletal muscle
index (SMI) and intramuscular adipose tissue corrected (IMAT-C). Sarcopenia (low
muscle mass) was defined as SMI<40.
RESULTS: Of 80 subjects, median age at diagnosis was 35 years. Median follow-up
8.6 years. Total 33% had low muscle mass (sarcopenic), and 56% had poor muscle
quality (high IMAT-C). Independent of age, clinical disease stage, and primary
insurer, high IMAT-C was associated with shorter PFS (HR 2.33, 95% CI 1.15-4.72;
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is the most common malignancy diagnosed among women in
South Africa, with the aggressive triple-negative subtype comprising
approximately 15% of breast cancers in this population. South Africa has the
largest population of people with HIV in the world. This study aims to evaluate
the association between HIV status and the proportion of patients with breast
cancer with the triple-negative subtype.
METHODS: We did a cross-sectional analysis of case-only data from the South
African Breast Cancer and HIV Outcomes (SABCHO) study, a prospective cohort
study recruiting patients with newly diagnosed breast cancer at six public
hospitals in South Africa. We analysed data from patients who enrolled in SABCHO
between Jan 1, 2015, and Jan 18, 2022. Women aged 18 years or older with newly
diagnosed and histologically confirmed invasive breast cancer were eligible.
Participants were classified as HIV-positive or HIV-negative by use of an
ELISA-based HIV test done at the time of enrolment. We developed multivariable
logistic regression models to test for an association between HIV status and the
proportion of triple-negative relative to non-triple-negative breast cancers
while adjusting for demographic and reproductive risk factors.
FINDINGS: Of the 4122 patients enrolled in the SABCHO cohort within our study
timeframe, 239 patients were excluded due to unknown breast cancer subtype
(n=141), HIV status (n=97), or race (n=1). 3883 women with breast cancer were
included in the study, of whom 637 (16·4%) had triple-negative breast cancer,
894 (23·0%) were HIV-positive, and 186 (4·8%) had triple-negative breast cancer
and HIV. Triple-negative breast cancer accounted for 186 (20·8%) of 894 breast
cancers among women who were HIV-positive and 451 (15·1%) of 2989 breast cancers
among women who were HIV-negative (p<0·0001). In the fully adjusted logistic
regression model, HIV-positive status was associated with an increased
proportion of triple-negative breast cancer (adjusted odds ratio [OR] 1·39, 95%
CI 1·12-1·74, compared with women who were HIV-negative). When compared with
women who were HIV-negative, the association between HIV-positive status and the
proportion of triple-negative breast cancer was strongest among the subgroup of
women with a duration of HIV infection of 2 years or longer (1·57, 1·23-2·00)
and those on antiretroviral therapy (ART; 1·47, 1·16-1·87).
INTERPRETATION: Patients with breast cancer and chronic HIV who are on ART are
more likely to have triple-negative breast cancer than patients with breast
cancer without HIV. This association is independent of age, race, and
reproductive factors.
FUNDING: US National Institutes of Health, University of the Witwatersrand,
South Africa Medical Research Council Common Epithelial Cancers Research Center,
Conquer Cancer Foundation, and Varmus Global Scholars Fund.
BACKGROUND: Tumor-associated collagen signature (TACS) is an independent
prognostic factor for breast cancer. However, it is unclear whether the complete
collagen signature, including TACS, the TACS-based collagen microscopic features
(TCMF1), and the TACS-based nuclear features (TCMF2), can provide additional
prognostic information for the current tumor-node-metastasis (TNM) staging
system.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We included 941 patients with breast cancer from three
cohorts: the training (n = 355), internal (n = 334), and external validation
cohorts (n = 252). TACS and TCMF1 were obtained by multiphoton microscopy (MPM).
TCMF2 was extracted on the hematoxylin and eosin images colocated with MPM
images. They were linearly combined to establish a complete collagen signature
score for reclassifying current TNM staging into stage Ⅰ (II and Ⅲ)/low risk and
stage Ⅰ (II and Ⅲ)/high risk.
RESULTS: The low-risk collagen signatures 'downstaged' patients in stage II or
Ⅲ, while the high-risk collagen signatures 'upstaged' patients with stage Ⅰ
tumors. After incorporating the complete collagen signature into the current TNM
staging system, the modified staging system had a higher ability to stratify
patients [referent, Ⅰ-new; Ⅱ-new, hazard ratio (HR) 8.655, 6.136, and 4.699 in
the training, internal validation, and external validation cohorts,
respectively; Ⅲ-new, HR 14.855, 11.201, and 13.245 in the corresponding three
cohorts, respectively] than the current TNM staging system (referent, Ⅰ; Ⅱ, HR
1.642, 1.853, and 1.371 in the corresponding three cohorts, respectively; Ⅲ, HR
4.131, 4.283, and 3.711 in the corresponding three cohorts, respectively).
Furthermore, the modified staging system showed a higher area under the curve
than the current TNM staging system (training cohort: 0.843 versus 0.683;
internal validation cohort: 0.792 versus 0.661; and external validation cohort:
0.793 versus 0.646).
CONCLUSIONS: The complete collagen signature is an independent predictor of
survival outcomes in breast cancer. It adds significant information about the
biological behavior of the disease to staging for breast cancer.
BACKGROUND: Rising cancer incidence, particularly for colorectal cancer, has
been reported in young adults. This study examined whether this is related to an
increase in mortality.
METHODS: We analysed World Health Organization (WHO) mortality data among young
adults aged 25-49 in 15 most populous upper-middle and high-income countries
from 1990 to 2021 with reliable data. Mid-year populations were retrieved from
the United Nations for the American Countries and from the WHO for the other
countries. We compared age-standardised mortality rates (ASMRs) in 2019-2021 to
2009-2011 and performed joinpoint regression analysis for all cancers and
selected most common cancer sites: colorectum, pancreas, lung and breast.
RESULTS: In 2019-2021, the highest ASMRs (per 100,000) were in Romanian males
(38.6) and Argentinian females (45.9), while the lowest ones in Japan (males:
16.3; females: 22.7). ASMRs for colorectal cancers increased in 2019-2021
compared to 2009-2011 in nine countries among men and in seven countries among
women. The highest increases were in the UK (males: +26.1%; females: +33.7%),
Canada (males: +25.3%), and Mexico (males: +33.5%; females: +29.7%). Long-term
analysis over the last three decades showed declining trends in total cancer
mortality in the majority of countries, in lung cancer mortality across all
countries, and in breast cancer in all countries except in Latin America.
CONCLUSIONS: While mortality from common cancers has generally decreased over
the past three decades, mortality from colorectal cancer has increased in some
countries. This highlights the need to control the obesity epidemic and
implement targeted surveillance strategies in young populations.
BACKGROUND: Anastomotic leakage (AL) is one of the severest complications after
laparoscopic surgery for middle/low rectal cancer, significantly impacting
patient outcomes. Identifying reliable predictive factors for AL remains a
clinical challenge. Serum nutritional biomarkers have been implicated in
surgical outcomes but are underexplored as predictive tools for AL in this
setting. Our study hypothesizes that preoperative serum levels of prealbumin
(PA), albumin (ALB), and transferrin (TRF), along with surgical factors, can
accurately predict AL risk.
AIM: To determine the predictive value of preoperative serum nutritional
biomarkers for rectal cancer AL following laparoscopic surgery.
METHODS: In the retrospective cohort study carried out at a tertiary cancer
center, we examined 560 individuals who underwent laparoscopic procedures for
rectal cancer from 2018 to 2022. Preoperative serum levels of PA, ALB, and TRF
were measured. We employed multivariate logistic regression to determine the
independent risk factors for AL, and a predictive model was constructed and
evaluated using receiver operating characteristic curve analysis.
RESULTS: AL occurred in 11.96% of cases, affecting 67 out of 560 patients.
Multivariate analysis identified PA, ALB, and TRF as the independent risk
factor, each with an odds ratio of 2.621 [95% confidence interval (CI):
1.582-3.812, P = 0.012], 3.982 (95%CI: 1.927-4.887, P = 0.024), and 2.109
(95%CI: 1.162-2.981, P = 0.031), respectively. Tumor location (< 7 cm from anal
verge) and intraoperative bleeding ≥ 300 mL also increased AL risk. The
predictive model demonstrated an excellent accuracy, achieving an area under the
receiver operating characteristic curve of 0.942, a sensitivity of 0.844, and a
specificity of 0.922, demonstrating an excellent ability to discriminate.
CONCLUSION: Preoperative serum nutritional biomarkers, combined with surgical
factors, reliably predict anastomotic leakage risk after rectal cancer surgery,
highlighting their importance in preoperative assessment.
BACKGROUND: Many tumors contain hypoxic microenvironments caused by inefficient
tumor vascularization. Hypoxic tumors have been shown to resist conventional
cancer therapies. Hypoxic cancer cells rely on glucose to meet their energetic
and anabolic needs to fuel uncontrolled proliferation and metastasis. This
glucose dependency is linked to a metabolic shift in response to hypoxic
conditions.
METHODS: To leverage the glucose dependency of hypoxic tumor cells, we assessed
the effects of a mild reduction in systemic glucose by controlling both dietary
carbohydrates with a ketogenic diet and endogenous glucose production by using
metformin on two mouse models of triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC).
RESULTS: Here, we showed that animals with TNBC treated with the combination
regimen of ketogenic diet and metformin (a) had their tumor burden lowered by
two-thirds, (b) displayed 38% slower tumor growth, and (c) showed 36% longer
latency, compared to the animals treated with a ketogenic diet or metformin
alone. As a result, lowering systemic glucose by this combined dietary and
pharmacologic approach improved overall survival in our mouse TNBC models by 31
days, approximately equivalent to 3 years of life extension in human terms.
CONCLUSION: This preclinical study demonstrates that reducing systemic glucose
by combining a ketogenic diet and metformin significantly inhibits tumor
proliferation and increases overall survival. Our findings suggest a possible
treatment for a broad range of hypoxic and glycolytic tumor types that can
augment existing treatment options to improve patient outcomes.
BACKGROUND: Until recently, targeted therapies have failed to benefit patients
with human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-low-expressing breast
cancer (BC). Nevertheless, antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) have reshaped their
prognosis.
OBJECTIVES: We performed a systematic review and meta-analysis to assess the
effectiveness of ADCs in patients with HER2-low advanced/metastatic (a/m) BC.
DESIGN: This study is a systematic review and meta-analysis.
DATA SOURCES: We searched PubMed, Embase, and Cochrane databases as well as the
American Society of Clinical Oncology, European Society for Medical Oncology,
and San Antonio Breast Cancer Symposium conference proceedings.
METHODS: Studies evaluating ADCs (trastuzumab deruxtecan (T-DXd), sacituzumab
govitecan (SG), MRG002, and RC48-ADC) in patients with HER2-low a/mBC were
included. We used R software (v.4.2.2) and random effects models for all
analyses. Heterogeneity was assessed using the I 2 test.
RESULTS: Overall, 14 studies were included (five real-world studies and nine
clinical trials (CTs)), with 2883 HER2-low a/mBC patients: 808 received
treatment of physician's choice (TPC), and 2075 ADCs. Most were treated with
T-DXd (n = 1691), followed by SG (n = 310), MRG002 (n = 56), and RC48-ADC
(n = 18). Patients treated with T-DXd achieved a significantly higher objective
response rate (ORR), disease control rate (DCR), and clinical benefit rate (CBR)
than those receiving other ADCs. In the pooled analysis of four randomized CTs,
ADCs statistically prolonged progression-free survival (n = 1828, hazard ratio
(HR) 0.50, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.36-0.68, I 2 = 82%, p < 0.001) and
overall survival (n = 1546, HR 0.70, 95% CI 0.57-0.86, I 2 = 43%, p < 0.001)
compared with TPC. Patients on ADCs also achieved a greater antitumor response
than TPC, including better ORR (odds ratio (OR), 3.7, 95% CI 2.5-5.6, I 2 = 59%,
p < 0.001), DCR (OR, 2.7, 95% CI 2.1-3.5, I 2 = 0%, p < 0.001), and CBR (OR,
3.6, 95% CI 2.6-5.2, I 2 = 56%, p < 0.01).
CONCLUSION: Our systematic review and meta-analysis confirms the efficacy of
ADCs in HER2-low a/m BC patients over TPC. Future studies should focus on
bringing ADCs into earlier lines of therapy in this population.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: This study was registered in PROSPERO (CRD42024452962).
BACKGROUND: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive form of breast
cancer that lacks three receptors commonly found in breast cancer cells. It is
associated with high mortality rates, and therefore, investigating therapies to
increase survival rates is crucial. Plant-derived compounds are being explored
as potential adjuvants for common chemotherapy drugs, such as paclitaxel (Pac).
PURPOSE: The study aimed to evaluate the cytotoxic effect of a prenylated
stilbene-rich extract (SRE) produced via a sustainable peanut hairy root culture
system and observe its potential as an adjuvant for Pac in human triple-negative
and hormone receptor-positive (HR+) breast cancer spheroids. The effects were
compared to arachidin-1 (A-1), a cytotoxic prenylated stilbene present in the
extract.
METHODS: SRE was produced from elicited peanut hairy root cultures. The extract
was purified using chromatography techniques to obtain the prenylated stilbene
arachidin-1 (A-1) with a purity of over 95 %. TNBC cell lines MDA-MB-231,
MDA-MB-436, and HR+ breast cancer cell line MCF-7 were used to evaluate the
cytotoxicity and apoptotic activity of SRE in comparison with A-1.
Two-dimensional (2D) experiments were performed using cell viability assays and
imaging microscopy. Three-dimensional (3D) spheroids cultures were established,
and the impact of SRE alone and in combination with Pac on cell viability and
caspase 3/7 activity was evaluated.
RESULTS: SRE (10 μg/mL) inhibited cell proliferation by approximately 50 % in
TNBC and MCF-7 cells in a time-dependent manner. Additionally, Annexin V FITC/PI
staining revealed that SRE (10 μg/mL) induced more apoptosis than A-1 at the
equimolar concentration (5 μM) in MDA-MB-231 cells. Combining SRE with Pac
decreased spheroid cell viability and induced apoptosis by activating caspases 3
and 7 in TNBC and HR+ breast cancer spheroids.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings highlight the potential of SRE as a novel adjuvant
for Pac chemotherapy in TNBC and HR+ breast cancer treatment.
BACKGROUND: This study aimed to develop and validate an ultrasound radiomics
model for distinguishing invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC) from ductal carcinoma
in situ (DCIS) by combining intratumoral and peritumoral features.
METHODS: Retrospective analysis was performed on 454 patients from Chengzhong
Hospital. The patients were randomly divided in accordance with a ratio of 8:2
into a training group (363 cases) and validation group (91 cases). In addition,
175 patients from Yanghu Hospital were used as the external test group. The
peritumoral ranges were set to 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10 mm. Mann-Whitney U-test,
recursive feature elimination, and a least absolute shrinkage and selection
operator were used to in the dimension reduction of the radiomics features and
clinical knowledge, and machine learning logistic regression classifiers were
utilized to construct the diagnostic model. The area under the curve (AUC) of
the receiver operating characteristics, accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity
were used to evaluate the model performance.
RESULTS: By combining peritumoral features of different ranges, the AUC of the
radiomics model was improved in the validation and test groups. In the
validation group, the maximum increase in AUC was 9.7% (P = 0.031, AUC = 0.803)
when the peritumoral range was 8 mm. Similarly, when the peritumoral range was
only 8 mm in the test group, the maximum increase in AUC was 4.9% (P = 0.005,
AUC = 0.770). In this study, the best prediction performance was achieved when
the peritumoral range was only 8 mm.
CONCLUSIONS: The ultrasound-based radiomics model that combined intratumoral and
peritumoral features exhibits good ability to distinguish between IDC and DCIS.
The selection of peritumoral range size exerts an important effect on the
prediction performance of the radiomics model.
BACKGROUND: Currently, there is a lack of biomarkers to identify breast cancer
(BC) patients who would benefit from CDK4/6 inhibitors. This study combined
machine learning (ML) algorithms based on transcriptomic data with both in vivo
and in vitro experiments to identify therapeutic efficacy-related biomarkers of
the CDK4/6 inhibitor ribociclib from the perspective of long non-coding RNA
(lncRNA).
METHODS: We used the Genomics of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer database along with
the "oncoPredict" algorithm to calculate the half maximal inhibitory
concentration (IC50) values for ribociclib based on transcriptome data. ML
algorithms were utilized to select key lncRNAs related to ribociclib and to
establish a model which could be used for selection of potential beneficiaries
of ribociclib. Cellular experiments were conducted to validate the ML analysis
and explore the potential biological mechanisms by which RERE-AS1 influences
ribociclib efficacy and malignant phenotype of BC cells. Correlation analysis
with clinical pathological factors, RT-qPCR experiments on tissue specimens, and
pan-cancer analysis were carried out to explore the expression pattern, and the
prognostic and diagnostic potential of RERE-AS1 in cancers.
RESULTS: We have identified 11 key ribociclib-related lncRNAs and constructed an
artificial neural network model (ANNM) based on lncRNA. Cellular experiments
demonstrated that overexpression of RERE-AS1 promoted the anti-tumor activity of
ribociclib in BC cells. Furthermore, RERE-AS1 is crucial in suppressing the
malignant traits of BC cells through the reduction of MEK and ERK
phosphorylation levels. Patients with smaller primary tumors and lower
pathological stage exhibited higher levels of RERE-AS1 expression. Lastly, a
pan-cancer analysis revealed that RERE-AS1 exhibits distinctly abnormal
expression patterns, prognostic significance, and clinical diagnostic value in
BC, compared to other cancers.
CONCLUSIONS: The ANNM established through ML algorithms can serve as predictive
indicators for the efficacy of ribociclib in BC patients. LncRNA RERE-AS1, a
newly discovered biomarker, holds significant promise for diagnosis, treatment,
and enhancing the therapeutic response to ribociclib in BC.
BACKGROUND: Exosome small RNAs are believed to be involved in the pathogenesis
of cancer, but their role in breast cancer is still unclear. This study utilized
machine learning models to screen for key exosome small RNAs and analyzed and
validated them.
METHOD: Peripheral blood samples from breast cancer screening positive and
negative people were used for small RNA sequencing of plasma exosomes. The
differences in the expression of small RNAs between the two groups were
compared. We used machine learning algorithms to analyze small RNAs with
significant differences between the two groups, fit the model through training
sets, and optimize the model through testing sets. We recruited new research
subjects as validation samples and used PCR-based quantitative detection to
validate the key small RNAs screened by the machine learning model. Finally,
target gene prediction and functional enrichment analysis were performed on
these key RNAs.
RESULTS: The machine learning model incorporates six small RNAs: piR-36,340,
piR-33,161, miR-484, miR-548ah-5p, miR-4282, and miR-6853-3p. The area under the
ROC curve (AUC) of the machine learning model in the training set was 0.985 (95%
CI = 0.948-1), while the AUC in the test set was 0.972 (95% CI = 0.882-0.995).
RT-qPCR was used to detect the expression levels of these key small RNAs in the
validation samples, and the results revealed that their expression levels were
significantly different between the two groups (P < 0.05). Through target gene
prediction and functional enrichment analysis, it was found that the functions
of the target genes were enriched mainly in the chemokine signaling pathway.
CONCLUSION: The combination of six plasma exosome small RNAs has good prognostic
value for women with positive breast cancer by imaging screening. The chemokine
signaling pathway may be involved in the early stage of breast cancer. It is
worth further exploring whether small RNAs mediate chemokine signaling pathways
in the pathogenesis of breast cancer through the delivery of exosomes.
BACKGROUND: Advances in transcriptional profiling methods have enabled the
discovery of molecular subtypes within and across traditional tissue-based
cancer classifications. Such molecular subgroups hold potential for improving
patient outcomes by guiding treatment decisions and revealing physiological
distinctions and targetable pathways. Computational methods for stratifying
transcriptomic data into molecular subgroups are increasingly abundant. However,
assigning samples to these subtypes and other transcriptionally inferred
predictions is time-consuming and requires significant bioinformatics expertise.
To address this need, we recently reported "ClassifieR," a flexible, interactive
cloud application for the functional annotation of colorectal and breast cancer
transcriptomes. Here, we report "ClassifieR 2.0" which introduces additional
modules for the molecular subtyping of prostate and high-grade serous ovarian
cancer (HGSOC).
RESULTS: ClassifieR 2.0 introduces ClassifieRp and ClassifieRov, two specialised
modules specifically designed to address the challenges of prostate and HGSOC
molecular classification. ClassifieRp includes sigInfer, a method we developed
to infer commercial prognostic prostate gene expression signatures from publicly
available gene-lists or indeed any user-uploaded gene-list. ClassifieRov
utilizes consensus molecular subtyping methods for HGSOC, including tools like
consensusOV, for accurate ovarian cancer stratification. Both modules include
functionalities present in the original ClassifieR framework for estimating
cellular composition, predicting transcription factor (TF) activity and single
sample gene set enrichment analysis (ssGSEA).
CONCLUSIONS: ClassifieR 2.0 combines molecular subtyping of prostate cancer and
HGSOC with commonly used sample annotation tools in a single, user-friendly
platform, allowing scientists without bioinformatics training to explore
prostate and HGSOC transcriptional data without the need for extensive
bioinformatics knowledge or manual data handling to operate various packages.
Our sigInfer method within ClassifieRp enables the inference of commercially
available gene signatures for prostate cancer, while ClassifieRov incorporates
consensus molecular subtyping for HGSOC. Overall, ClassifieR 2.0 aims to make
molecular subtyping more accessible to the wider research community. This is
crucial for increased understanding of the molecular heterogeneity of these
cancers and developing personalised treatment strategies.
BACKGROUND: Femoral bone metastases (FBM) or lesions (FBL) can lead to loss of
mobility and independence due to skeletal-related events (SRE), e.g. pain,
deformity and pathological fractures. Aim of this study was to analyze effects
of radiotherapy and surgery, different surgical techniques and complications on
disease-specific survival (DSS).
METHODS: Patients who underwent palliative therapy for FBM or FBL between 2014
and 2020 were retrospectively analyzed. Chi-square test was used to detect
intergroup differences. Survival was calculated using Kaplan-Meier method, Cox
regression and compared using log-rank test. Complications were evaluated using
Chi-Square test.
RESULTS: 145 patients were treated for proximal femoral BM/BL or pathologic
fractures (10 bilaterally). Three groups were classified: surgery only (S,
n = 53), surgery with adjuvant radiation (S + RT, n = 58), and primary radiation
only (RT, n = 44). Most common primary tumors were breast (n = 31), prostate
(n = 27), and non-small cell lung cancer (n = 27). 47 patients underwent surgery
for an impending, 61 for a manifest pathological fracture. There were no
significant differences in DSS between the 3 groups (S = 29.8, S + RT = 32.2,
RT = 27.1 months), with the S + RT group having the longest one-year survival.
Local complications occurred in 25 of 145 patients after a mean interval of 9.9
months.
CONCLUSION: Due to the steadily increasing incidence and survival of patients
with FBM/FBL, indication for prevention and treatment of painful and
immobilizing SREs should be critically assessed. Surgical treatment should
always be performed with maximum stability and, whenever possible, adjuvant RT.
BACKGROUND: There are sporadic facility-based reports but an information gap in
the cancer burden in the community is apparent. To address this, the Nepal
Health Research Council (NHRC) started a Population-based Cancer Registry (PBCR)
in 2018 in the country. Thus, this study aims to identify the cancer burden in
the female population, especially in the reproductive organs.   Methods: A
quantitative database analysis of the Population-based Cancer Registry for year
2018 and 2019 was performed. Data entered in the TSV (Tab-separated values)
files were imported to MS Excel and SPSS data Window and variables regrouped
before analysis. The national census, WHO standardized population, and registry
data were used for the descriptive analysis of the registry variables. Ethical
approval was taken from the Ethical Review Board of NHRC.
RESULT: Out of 6854 cancer registries, the female population was 3590 with a
male-to-female ratio of 10:11. This registry covers 10.75% of the countryâ€™s
population. The crude and age-standardized cancer incidence rates were 1.24% and
66.2 per 100,000 for the female population respectively. Reproductive organs
(21%) and breast (19.7%) cancers are the most common in females, and out of
reproductive organs cervical (58%) and ovarian (25%) cancers are the commonest.
Surgery was the main treatment modality (32.7%) with or without chemotherapy and
radiotherapy.
CONCLUSIONS: The burden of cancer is higher in females because of breast cancer.
Reproductive organ cancers and breast cancers share an equal burden of around
20% each. The most common female genital cancer is of uterine cervix followed by
the ovary.
BACKGROUND: The 2020 cancer report states that breast cancer remains a
significant cause of death for females, despite the use of various strategies
for early detection and treatment. However, there are still gaps in the fight
against this disease. Researchers are exploring the hippo pathway, one of eight
significant pathways involved in cancer progression, for potential biomarkers to
use in personalized therapeutics.
METHODS: The current study used bioinformatic tools such as DEGs analysis,
Methsurv, Km Plotter to generate data that can predict molecular biomarkers
associated with hippo pathway in breast cancer development and treatment. The
protein-protein interaction pathway was generated using the STRING database to
find associations of hippo pathway genes with other dysregulated genes in breast
cancer datasets. A disease enrichment study was also done to explore the
potential of the hippo pathway in various aspects.
RESULTS: LATS2 and FAT4 genes of the hippo pathway have shown an interesting
association with overall survival, hypermethylation, genetic alterations, and
decreased expression levels in the breast cancer cohort. Our findings suggest
that both of these genes are associated with breast cancer progression and
diagnosis and can be utilized as predictive biomarkers by oncologists for
personalized therapy in patients.
BACKGROUND: Early and accurate identification of the metastatic tumor types of
brain metastasis (BM) is essential for appropriate treatment and management.
METHODS: A total of 450 patients were enrolled from two centers as a primary
cohort who carry 764 BMs originated from non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC,
patient = 173, lesion = 187), small cell lung cancer (SCLC, patient = 84,
lesion = 196), breast cancer (BC, patient = 119, lesion = 200), and
gastrointestinal cancer (GIC, patient = 74, lesion = 181). A third center
enrolled 28 patients who carry 67 BMs (NSCLC = 24, SCLC = 22, BC = 10, and
GIC = 11) to form an external test cohort. All patients received
contrast-enhanced T1-weighted (T1CE) and T2-weighted (T2W) MRI scans at 3.0 T
before treatment. Radiomics features were calculated from BM and brain-to-tumor
interface (BTI) region in the MRI image and screened using least absolute
shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) to construct the radiomics signature
(RS). Volume of peritumor edema (VPE) was calculated and combined with RS to
create a joint model. Performance of the models was assessed by receiver
operating characteristic (ROC).
RESULTS: The BTI-based RS showed better performance compared to BM-based RS. The
combined models integrating BTI features and VPE can improve identification
performance in AUCs in the training (LC/NLC vs. SCLC/NSCLC vs. BC/GIC, 0.803 vs.
0.949 vs. 0.918), internal validation (LC/NLC vs. SCLC/NSCLC vs. BC/GIC, 0.717
vs. 0.854 vs. 0.840), and external test (LC/NLC vs. SCLC/NSCLC vs. BC/GIC, 0.744
vs. 0.839 vs. 0.800) cohorts.
CONCLUSION: This study indicated that BTI-based radiomics features and VPE are
associated with the metastatic tumor types of BM.
BACKGROUND: In Yemen, effective early detection and a comprehensive grasp of
breast cancer symptoms and risk factors are vital in preventing its potentially
deadly spread. However, challenges arise in combating breast cancer in Yemen due
to the lack of patient registries, national strategies, and structured cancer
treatment plans.
OBJECTIVE: This research sought to evaluate the awareness levels of breast
cancer and the perceived obstacles to breast cancer screening among adult Yemeni
women.
METHODS: A community-based cross-sectional questionnaire study was conducted
from September 2023 to January 2024 from two teaching and largest hospitals in
the capital municipality, Sana'a, Yemen, where 533 women (≥ 18 years old) were
conveniently selected in this study. Data were analyzed using SPSS software
(version 23).. The Chi-square test was used to test associations. The factors
associated with breast cancer awareness and barriers to breast cancer screening
were analyzed separately, using multivariable logistic regression.
RESULTS: The study revealed that 88.6% of women were familiar with breast
cancer, and 61.9% being knowledgeable about screening methods such as clinical
breast examination (CBE) or mammography. The primary hindrance to screening
(84.1%, n = 53) was the absence of symptoms or pain. The second most common
reason for not undergoing screening was a lack of understanding about breast
cancer and its treatment (61.9%, n = 39).
CONCLUSION: To enhance breast cancer screening rates among Yemeni women
consistently, targeted educational programs emphasizing the benefits of early
detection and dispelling misconceptions and barriers related to the disease are
essential.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy experience body
composition changes impacting treatment outcomes. The role of resistance
training in mitigating chemotherapy-induced sarcopenia in breast cancer patients
is not well defined.
AIMS: This study aims to assess the efficacy of resistance training in
preventing sarcopenia among breast cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy.
METHODS: A systematic search was conducted across PubMed, EMBASE, Medline, the
Cochrane Library, and CINAHL until May 5, 2023. Selected literature focused on
the effects of resistance training on body fat, muscle mass, muscle strength,
and physical performance in breast cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy.
Cochrane Risk of Bias tool version 2.0 was employed for quality assessment, and
data were analyzed using Comprehensive Meta-Analysis version 2.0.
RESULTS: Eleven randomized controlled trials (RCTs) showed that resistance
training had a significant positive impact on reducing body fat (SMD = -0.250,
95% CI [-0.450, -0.050]), increasing lean body mass (SMD = 0.374, 95% CI [0.178,
0.571]), and enhancing handgrip strength at both the affected site (SMD = 0.326,
95% CI [0.108, 0.543]) and the nonaffected site (SMD = 0.276, 95% CI [0.059,
0.492]). Additionally, significant improvements were observed in leg press
strength (SMD = 0.598, 95% CI [0.401, 0.796]) and overall physical performance
BACKGROUND: Trastuzumab-emtansine have been recently suspected to be associated
with the development of pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH).
RESEARCH QUESTION: Is there an association between trastuzumab,
trastuzumab-emtansine, or trastuzumab-deruxtecan and the development of PAH?
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: Characteristics of incident PAH cases treated with
trastuzumab, trastuzumab-emtansine or trastuzumab-deruxtecan, were analyzed from
the French PH Registry, the VIGIAPATH program, concurrently with a
pharmacovigilance disproportionality analysis using the WHO pharmacovigilance
database using a broad definition of PH and a narrow definition of PAH. A signal
of disproportionate reporting was deemed significant if the lower boundary of
the 95% credibility interval (95%CI) of the Information Component (IC) was
superior to 0. The variables were expressed as median (interquartile range).
RESULTS: In the French PH Registry, we identified 8 incident cases of PAH after
trastuzumab-emtansine exposure and none with trastuzumab alone or
trastuzumab-deruxtecan. All cases occured in women (age of 56 (49-61) years)
suffering from breast cancer. The delay between first exposure and PAH diagnosis
was 43 (4.5-55) months. At diagnosis, 5 were in NYHA functional class III/IV
with severe hemodynamic impairment (mean pulmonary artery pressure of 42 mmHg,
cardiac index 2.51 L/min/m2, and pulmonary vascular resistance of 9.7 WU).
Disproportionality analysis showed that only trastuzumab-emtansine demonstrated
a significant signal of disproportionate reporting using both broad definition
of PH (IC 1.46, 0.86-1.95) and narrow definition of PAH (IC 1.76, 0.83-2.46).
Trastuzumab displayed a significant signal using only the broad definition of
PH, while trastuzumab-deruxtecan was not associated with any significant signals
of disproportionate reporting.
INTERPRETATION: Our results suggest that more patients exposed to
trastuzumab-emtansine developed PH compared to trastuzumab alone. Further
assessment of this safety signal and exploration of pathophysiological
mechanisms is needed.
BACKGROUND: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) recurrence and metastasis are
the major causes of failure in TNBC therapy. The difficulties in treating TNBCs
may be because of increased cancer cell plasticity that involves the fine-tuning
of cellular redox homeostasis, mitochondrial bioenergetics, metabolic
characteristics, and the development of cancer stem cells (CSCs).
PURPOSE: To investigate the effects and the underlying mechanisms of the
phytosesquiterpene lactone deoxyelephantopin (DET) and its semi-synthesized
derivative (DETD-35) in suppressing different phenotypic TNBC cell populations
that contribute to tumor metastasis.
METHODS: A timelapse microfluidic-based system was established to analyze the
effects of DETD-35 and DET on cell migration behavior in an oxygen gradient.
Seahorse real-time cell metabolic analyzer and gas
chromatography/quadrupole-time-of-flight mass spectrometry (GC/Q-TOF MS) were
utilized to analyze the effects of the compounds on mitochondrial bioenergetics
in TNBC cells. A miRNA knockout technique and miRNA sponges were employed to
evaluate the miR-4284 involvement in the anti-TNBC cell effect of either
compound.
RESULTS: DETD-35 and DET attenuated TNBC cell migration toward hypoxic regions
under a 2-19 % oxygen gradient in a timelapse microfluidic-based system. DETD-35
and DET also suppressed CSC-like phenotypes, including the expression of Sox2,
Oct4, and CD44 in TNBC cells under hypoxic conditions. DETD-35 and DET affected
mitochondrial basal respiration, ATP production, proton leak, and primary
metabolism, including glycolysis, the TCA cycle, and amino acid metabolism in
the lung-metastatic TNBC cells. Furthermore, the expression of mitophagy markers
PARKIN, BNIP3, PINK1, LC3-II, and apoptotic markers Bax, cleaved caspase 7, and
cleaved PARP in hypoxic and lung-metastatic TNBC cells was also regulated by
treatment with either compound. In miR-4284 knockout cells or miR-4284 inhibitor
co-treated TNBC cells, DET- and DETD-35-induced over-expression of mitophagic
and apoptotic markers was partially reversed, indicating miR-4284 involved with
the compounds caused programmed cell death.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrated the novel activities of DETD-35 and DET in
suppressing CSC-like phenotypes and metastatic TNBC cells through the
de-regulation of mitochondrial bioenergetics.
BACKGROUND: The risks of postoperative complications in breast cancer patients
vary by patient and tumor characteristics. Elevated BMI and invasive lobular
carcinoma (ILC) increase risks of surgical complications and positive margins,
respectively.
METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed patients with BMI ≥30 ​kg/m2 from an
institutional ILC database. The primary outcome was surgical complication rate
by procedure type. The secondary outcome was positive margin rates by surgical
approach, stratified by T stage.
RESULTS: Of 154 analyzed patients, standard BCS, lumpectomy with oncoplastic
closure, and simple mastectomy had the lowest complication rates (18.2 ​%,
17.0 ​%, 11.8 ​%). Oncoplastic reduction mammoplasty and mastectomy with
aesthetic closure had the highest rates (35.5 ​%, 33.3 ​%). The overall positive
margin rate was 28.5 ​%, significantly higher in BCS vs. mastectomy (37.4 ​% vs.
15.0 ​%, p ​= ​0.003). Oncoplastic surgery significantly reduced positive margin
rates in BCS.
CONCLUSION: In this study, 23.4 ​% of patients experienced surgical
complications, with higher rates in oncoplastic/reconstructive approaches.
However, oncoplastic surgery reduced positive margins, highlighting the
importance of balancing risks for optimal surgical planning.
BACKGROUND: The immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment (TME) is a key
characteristic of human cancer. Immunotherapy has emerged as a promising
treatment strategy to overcome immune escape and has gained widespread use in
recent years. In particular, the blockade of PD-1/PD-L1 interaction holds
significant importance in oncotherapy. Combining anti-PD-1/PD-L1 with small
molecule inhibitors targeting key pathways represents an emerging trend in
therapeutic development.
METHODS: To validate our findings biologically, we employed qRT-PCR or Western
blotting and immunofluorescence staining techniques to assess the expression
levels of DIAPH1 and PD-L1 in cells. Additionally, CCK8 and clone formation
assays were utilized to evaluate cell proliferation ability, while flow assays
were conducted to detect apoptosis in T cells.
RESULTS: Knockdown of DIAPH1 restored the tumor-killing capacity of T cells,
effectively suppressing tumor immune escape. We observed a highly positive
correlation between the expression levels of DIAPH1 and
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase (HMGCR), which can be competitively
inhibited by lovastatin. Through Sybyl analysis followed by confirmation via
micro scale thermophoresis, we identified lovastatin as a potential inhibitor
targeting DIAPH1. Lovastatin downregulated DIAPH1 expression both in tumor cell
lines and xenograft lung cancer tissues within a mouse lung cancer model.
Furthermore, we found that lovastatin degraded DIAPH1 through lysosomal
degradation pathway. Treatment with lovastatin was strongly associated with
improved response rates and prolonged overall survival among patients with lung
adenocarcinoma. Finally, overexpression of DIAPH1 reversed the inhibitory
effects mediated by lovastatin on tumor development.
CONCLUSIONS: Lovastatin downregulates PD-L1 expression by targeting DIAPH1 and
restores the tumor-killing ability of T cells to block tumor immune escape.
Lovastatin may become a potential drug for cancer patients to enhance
immunotherapy response in the clinic.
BACKGROUND: Cancer diagnosis has been described as a significant factor causing
psychological stress, which may increase a vulnerability to develop
psychological disorders, decrease quality of life levels and affect the response
to cancer treatment.
OBJECTIVE: To validate the Newly Diagnosed Breast Cancer Stress Scale (NDBCSS)
and to explore the differences concerning clinical and sociodemographic
variables.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Cross-sectional study. Patients recently diagnosed with
breast cancer on the day they received the definitive cancer diagnosis were
invited to participate. The Perceived Stress Scale (PSS) and the NDBCSS were
completed; the latter previously underwent a validation process into Spanish
(reliability, content validity, structure -EFA- and convergent validity).
RESULTS: 176 patients participated; their mean age was of 52.8 years. The scale
obtained a content validity of 0.53 and reliability of 0.791; the EFA showed 2
factors explaining 42.31% of the variance. Stress levels were 23.05 (PSS) and
13.2 (NDBCSS). Concern about side effects, the progression of the illness and
the lack of information were reported as the most critical stressors for these
patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The NDBCSS showed acceptable psychometric properties for its
application in Mexican patients and probably for patients with similar personal
characteristics and linguistic and cultural contexts. Based on the results, it
is possible to design precise interventions addressed to the stressors they
face, such as the impact of the disease and the treatment.
BACKGROUND: Patients with cancer often face depression and anxiety, and
mindfulness-based interventions, including internet-based versions, can
effectively reduce these symptoms and improve their quality of life. This study
aims to investigate the impact of internet-based mindfulness-based interventions
(e-MBIs) on anxiety, depression, and stress symptoms in patients with prostate
or breast cancer.
OBJECTIVE: The primary aims are to assess the association between the amount and
variety of e-MBI practices and symptom reduction. Second, this study aims to
examine how baseline information such as sociodemographic characteristics,
dispositional mindfulness (DM), and dispositional self-compassion (DSC)
correlate with both app usage and symptom reduction.
METHODS: Participants included 107 patients with cancer (68 women with breast
cancer and 38 men with prostate cancer) enrolled in a hospital setting. They
were assigned to the intervention group of the NEVERMIND project, using the
e-BMI module via the NEVERMIND app. A longitudinal design involved Pearson
correlation analysis to determine the relationship between the amount and
duration of e-MBI practices. Linear regression analysis was conducted to gauge
the dose-response effect, evaluating the impact of DM and DSC on depression,
anxiety, and stress. Negative binomial regression was conudcted to study
sociodemographic factors' influence on the amount of practice in e-MBIs.
RESULTS: The participants with more diverse and sustained mindfulness practices
experienced significant reductions in depression, anxiety, and stress. A high
correlation (0.94) between e-MBI practices and symptom reduction was also
highlighted. Male, married, and highly educated patients were more likely to
engage in mindfulness. Even if DM and DSC did not impact the amount or variety
of practices correlated, they were correlated with symptom reduction, showing
that higher levels were associated with significant reductions in depression,
anxiety, and stress.
CONCLUSIONS: While more e-MBI practice is linked to reduced anxiety, depression,
and stress, this study emphasizes the crucial role of variety of practice over
amount. DM and DSC are key in shaping intervention effectiveness and may act as
protectors against psychological distress. Using app log data, our research
provides a unique perspective on e-MBI impact, contributing to cancer care
understanding and guiding future studies.
BACKGROUND: This study assessed health care system costs and resource
utilization for adult women with breast cancer in Ontario, Canada. The goal was
to update costs by stage, age, and phase of care from a health care system
perspective.
DATA AND METHODS: A retrospective analysis was conducted using linked
population-based administrative data. The study included women diagnosed with
breast cancer from 2017 to 2021, with follow-up data until 2022. Cases were
matched with controls in a 1:5 ratio using birth year, local health integrative
network, income quintile, and resource utilization band at baseline. Incremental
costs were estimated using linear regression. The modified income quintile was
the neighbourhood- or area-level income quintile.
RESULTS: Among the 37,133 cases matched with 185,665 controls, the average age
at diagnosis was 62 years. For the entire study duration, cases incurred an
additional cost of $27,485 per year, compared with controls. Costs rose with
disease severity, ranging from $15,588 for stage I to $137,319 for stage IV. The
highest incremental costs occurred during the first 12 months after diagnosis
(initial: $43,408), followed by the last 12 months before death (terminal:
$25,940), and then interim years (continuous: $9,533 per year). Additionally,
the incremental cost of breast cancer was higher when diagnosis was before age
70 ($28,415), compared with diagnosis at age 70 and older ($25,254).
INTERPRETATION: The findings align with previous studies on breast cancer costs
for the health care system. Additionally, variations in costs based on disease
severity, care phase, and age were emphasized, highlighting higher costs for
metastatic breast cancer cases, women younger than 70 years, and the initial 12
months following diagnosis.
BACKGROUND: Compared with all other cancer types, Breast cancer (BC) among women
has now exceeded them all as the primary reason for cancer worldwide. The BC
represents 11.7% of all cancer cases and accounts for a predestined 2.3 million
new cases. It is the fourth primary reason for cancer-associated deaths in
women. With a staggering 200-400% increase in the relative incidence of BC in
Egypt, there is an urgent need for new diagnostic or predictive markers.
PURPOSE: The current investigation aims to explore the connection of the
functional TNF-α-308G > A (rs1800629) single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) with
different breast cancer predictive indices.
METHODS: The ARMS-PCR method was used for genotyping TNF-α-308G > A SNP. Three
groups were recruited for the study: 79 patients with benign breast inflammation
(BBI); 163 with breast cancer (BC) and 144 controls (C).
RESULTS: The TNF-α-308G > A SNP was distributed among different groups in a
unique pattern; in the control group 63.9% of cases were in the GG, 34% were in
the GA, and 2.1% were in the AA. The BC group had 14% GG, 79% GA, and 7% AA,
while the BBI group had 24% GG, 76% GA, and 0% AA. The AA genotype and A allele
represented a strong significant correlation with risk factors in the BC group
(ORAA: 14.67 [95% CI = 3.78-56.91] and ORA: 0.27 [95% CI = 0.19-0.39],
respectively; P < 0.0001) in contrast to the control group. However, in the BBI
group, a strong significant correlation was noted with the GA genotype (ORGA:
5.93 [95% CI = 3.18-11.04] P < 0.0001). In the BC group, the AA genotype shows a
significant increase in Nottingham Prognostic Index (NPI) in positive ER and PR
in contrast to the relevant negative ones (P = 0.02 and 0.002, respectively).
However, the GA genotype significantly increased NPI in positive Her2 and
metastatic patients (P = 0.03 and 0.01, respectively).
CONCLUSION: This research is the first to correlate TNF-α-308G > A (rs1800629)
SNP in Egyptian BC patients. The A allele, GA & AA genotypes, and the
Overdominant model of the TNF-α-308G > A gene variants were recorded as
prognostic risk factors for BC carcinogenesis.
BACKGROUND: Olanzapine is an atypical antipsychotic drug used for
chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting. It is particularly effective in
preventing delayed nausea and vomiting induced by highly emetogenic chemotherapy
(HEC). However, it has side effects, such as hyperglycemia and somnolence, the
efficacy and safety of adding olanzapine to triplet antiemetic therapy (5-HT3
receptor antagonist, NK1 receptor antagonist, and dexamethasone) must be
verified.
METHODS: We performed a systematic review and meta-analysis to compare the
effectiveness of olanzapine combined with triplet antiemetic therapy and triplet
antiemetic therapy in preventing nausea and vomiting for HEC. We set five items
(hyperglycemia, prevention of vomiting, prevention of nausea, adverse events,
and cost (drug costs)) as outcomes and conducted a systematic review.
RESULTS: Five randomized controlled trials was extracted and they showed that
the addition of olanzapine was effective in control of nausea and vomiting,
especially in the delayed phase. Complete response of acute and delayed phase
were significantly higher in the olanzapine group. Risk difference was - 0.14
[95% CI - 0.26, - 0.03; p = 0.02] and - 0.14 [95% CI - 0.19, -0.09;
p < 0.00001], respectively. Additionally, we evaluated hyperglycemia and
somnolence, which are typical side effects of olanzapine. However, the incidence
of grade ≥ 2 was low in both events, and there was no significant difference
between olanzapine and control groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Adding olanzapine to triplet antiemetic therapy is useful in
preventing nausea and vomiting induced by HEC and there would be minimal adverse
effects from the combination use.
BACKGROUND: There are multiple methods and biomarkers with different detection
rates to circulating tumor cells (CTCs) in women with breast cancer (BC).
However, to the best our knowledge, no study has been carried out to detect CTCs
in women with early BC in Mexico.
OBJECTIVE: Calculate the detection rate of CTCs in peripheral blood of Mexican
women with early BC by quantification of the relative expression of KRT19, MUC1
and SCGB2A2.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Observational, longitudinal, analytical study, which
included 62 Mexican women, over 18 years of age, with BC clinical stage 0, I and
II. Cells with a density < 1.077 g/ml were isolated from 4 mL of peripheral
blood obtained 24 h before surgery, RNAS was extracted and RT-qPCR was performed
to quantify the relative expression of KRT19, MUC1 and SCGB2A2.
RESULTS: The diagnosis of BC was confirmed in the definitive pathological study
in 59 women. 1 case (1.7%), expressed KRT19, 18 cases (30.5%) MUC1, 2 cases
(3.4%) SCGB2A2, and 19 cases (32.2%) expressed at least one of the three
biomarkers.
CONCLUSIONS: CTCs detection rates were like those reported in other populations
when MUC1 was used, but lower when KRT19 and SCGB2A2 were used. Standardization
of blood sample collection and processing, as well as biomarker expression
analysis, is important to reduce variability in the detection of CTCs in
specific populations.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer survivors face a higher risk of subsequent primary
cancers. This study investigated the patterns of subsequent cancer risk
according to time since breast cancer diagnosis.
METHODS: Using data from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results program
(2000-2018), we identified a cohort of 771,681 breast cancer survivors. Standard
incidence ratios (SIR) were calculated by comparing the observed to the expected
number of subsequent cancers over different follow-up periods since breast
cancer diagnosis. Analyses were conducted for multiple cancer types, stratified
by hormone receptor (HR) status and treatment of the first breast cancer, age,
and race/ethnicity.
RESULTS: Survivors experienced a 16% increased risk of subsequent cancer with
the SIR continuing to increase with longer follow-up (SIR=1.04, 1.22, and 1.31
for 12-59, 60-119, and ≥120 months). This trend was driven primarily by a
subsequent breast cancer, particularly among women <50 years, those with initial
HR-negative cancer, and racial/ethnic minorities. The patterns of subsequent
non-breast cancer risk varied by type. An early-onset and sustained increased
risk was observed for subsequent leukemia, thyroid, soft tissue, melanoma,
pancreas, and uterine cancer. A delayed increased risk was observed for
subsequent esophagus, ovarian, oral cavity/pharynx, and lung cancer, while for
small intestine, stomach, kidney, and colorectal cancer there was a decrease
after an initial increased risk.
CONCLUSIONS: Patterns in subsequent cancer risk since breast cancer diagnosis
differ by cancer type and characteristics of the first breast cancer.
IMPACT: These findings can inform etiology and tailored approaches to screening
and prevention of subsequent cancers.
BACKGROUND: HER2-positive breast cancer (BC), a highly aggressive malignancy,
has been treated with the targeted therapy inetetamab for metastatic cases.
Inetetamab (Cipterbin) is a recently approved targeted therapy for HER2-positive
metastatic BC, significantly prolonging patients' survival. Currently, there is
no established biomarker to reliably predict or assess the therapeutic efficacy
of inetetamab in BC patients.
METHODS: This study harnesses the power of metabolomics and machine learning to
uncover biomarkers for inetetamab in BC therapy. A total of 23 plasma samples
from inetetamab-treated BC patients were collected and stratified into
responders and nonresponders. Ultra-high-performance liquid
chromatography-quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometry was utilized to
analyze the metabolites in blood samples. A combination of univariate and
multivariate statistical analyses was employed to identify these metabolites,
and their biological functions were then ascertained by Gene Ontology (GO) and
Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment analysis. Finally,
machine learning algorithms were employed to screen responsive biomarkers from
all differentially expressed metabolites.
RESULTS: Our finding revealed 6889 unique metabolites that were detected.
Pathways like retinol metabolism, fatty acid biosynthesis, and steroid hormone
biosynthesis were enriched for differentially expressed metabolites. Notably,
two key metabolites associated with inetetamab response in BC were identified:
FAPy-adenine and 2-Pyrocatechuic acid. There was some negative correlation
between progress-free survival (PFS) and their kurtosis content.
CONCLUSIONS: In summary, the identification of these two significant
differential metabolites holds promise as potential biomarkers for evaluating
and predicting inetetamab treatment outcomes in BC, ultimately contributing to
the diagnosis of the disease and the discovery of prognostic markers.
BACKGROUND: Mammographic imaging is essential for breast cancer detection and
diagnosis. In addition to masses, calcifications are of concern and the early
detection of breast cancer also heavily relies on the correct interpretation of
suspicious microcalcification clusters. Even with advances in imaging and the
introduction of novel techniques such as digital breast tomosynthesis and
contrast-enhanced mammography, a correct interpretation can still be challenging
given the subtle nature and large variety of calcifications.
PURPOSE: Computer simulated lesion models can serve to develop, optimize, or
improve imaging techniques. In addition to their use in comparative (virtual
clinical trial) detection experiments, these models have potential application
in training deep learning models and in the understanding and interpretation of
breast lesions. Existing simulation methods, however, often lack the capacity to
model the diversity occurring in breast lesions or to generate models relevant
for a specific case. This study focuses on clusters of microcalcifications and
introduces an automated, flexible toolbox designed to generate
microcalcification cluster models customized to specific tasks.
METHODS: The toolbox allows users to control a large number of simulation
parameters related to model characteristics such as lesion size, calcification
shape, or number of microcalcifications per cluster. This leads to the
capability of creating models that range from regular to complex clusters. Based
on the input parameters, which are either tuned manually or pre-set for a
specific clinical type, different sets of models can be simulated depending on
the use case. Two lesion generation methods are described. The first method
generates three-dimensional microcalcification clusters models based on
geometrical shapes and transformations. The second method creates
two-dimensional (2D) microcalcification cluster models for a specific 2D
mammographic image. This novel method employs radiomics analysis to account for
local textures, ensuring the simulated microcalcification cluster is
appropriately integrated within the existing breast tissue. The toolbox is
implemented in the Python language and can be conveniently run through a Jupyter
Notebook interface, openly accessible at
https://gitlab.kuleuven.be/medphysqa/deploy/breast-calcifications. Validation
studies performed by radiologists assessed the level of malignancy and realism
of clusters tuned with specific parameters and inserted in mammographic images.
RESULTS: The flexibility of the toolbox with multiple simulation methods is
illustrated, as well as the compatibility with different simulation frameworks
and image types. The automation allows for the straightforward and fast
generation of diverse microcalcification cluster models. The generated models
are most likely applicable for various tasks as they can be configured in a
variety of ways and inserted in different types of mammographic images of
multiple acquisition systems. Validation studies confirmed the capacity to
simulate realistic clusters and capture clinical properties when tuned with
appropriate parameter settings.
CONCLUSION: This simulation toolbox offers a flexible means of simulating
microcalcification cluster models with potential use in both technical and
clinical research in mammography imaging. The 3D generation methods allow for
specifying many characteristics regarding the calcification shape and cluster
architecture, and the 2D generation method presents a novel manner to create
microcalcification clusters tailored to existing breast textures.
BACKGROUND: Intravoxel incoherent motion diffusion-weighted imaging (IVIM-DWI),
which indicates biological tissue attributes, may be applied to accurately
assess breast tumors.
PURPOSE: To analyze the IVIM parameters of different molecular prognostic
factors and subtypes to find out whether there are any connections.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A total of 181 patients enrolled in this retrospective
study had preoperative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examinations, and
pathologies were verified as breast cancers. Regions of interest were placed at
all slices of the parameter maps (D, tissue diffusivity; ADC, apparent diffusion
coefficient; f, perfusion fraction; and D*, pseudo-diffusivity maps) of IVIM and
generated parameter values to be used for comparative analysis among molecular
prognostic factors and subtypes.
RESULTS: D and ADC were greater in estrogen receptor (ER)-negative, human
epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-positive, and Ki67-low expression
groups (all P values < 0.05). The progesterone receptor (PR)-negative group had
a higher D value (P < 0.05). f was larger in the lymph node metastasis-negative
group and the PR-positive group (P = 0.012 and 0.046, respectively). Among
breast cancer subtypes, D and ADC were different between the HER2-overexpression
and the Luminal B (HER2-negative) subtypes (P = 0.019 and 0.028, respectively).
The difference in D between the luminal and non-luminal subtypes was
statistically significant (P = 0.008). The triple-negative subtype significantly
differs from the other subtypes in D* and f (P = 0.012 and 0.016, respectively).
CONCLUSION: IVIM-related metrics exhibited relationships with breast cancer
molecular prognosis factors and subtypes.
BACKGROUND: This brief report examines statin prescription trends for primary
cardiovascular disease (CVD) prevention in breast cancer (BC) survivors with
diabetes, a large population at particularly high CVD risk.
METHODS: A population-based, retrospective cohort study was conducted using
Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) cancer registry data linked
to Medicare claims. We identified women with preexisting diabetes who were
diagnosed with stage 0-III primary BC between 2008 and 2017 without preexisting
CVD. We assessed statin prescription rates over time and also examined
differences in statin prescription rates according to patient sociodemographic
characteristics. Using a multivariate logistic regression adjusted for
sociodemographic and clinical variables, independent predictors of statin
prescription were identified.
RESULTS: Of 8,423 BC patients with diabetes without preexisting CVD, 5,698 (68%)
had a statin prescription. Statin prescriptions increased over time (BC
diagnosis year 2008-2009: 65%, 2010-2011: 67%, 2012-2013: 66%, 2014-2015: 69%,
2016-2017: 70%; p = 0.01) and differed by age (66-69: 66%, 70-74: 70%, 75-79:
69%, ≥80: 65%; p < 0.01) and race (White: 68%, Black: 62%, Latina: 66%, Other:
72%; p < 0.01). In a multivariate analysis, race (Black vs. White: OR 0.80, 95%
CI: 0.68-0.95) remained a predictor of statin prescription.
CONCLUSION: In older early-stage BC survivors, statin prescriptions increased
over time and varied by age, race, and BC stage. These findings can potentially
inform strategies to improve guideline-concordant statin prescriptions in a
group at high risk for CVD and reduce disparities.
BACKGROUND: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive and complex
subtype of breast cancer characterized by a lack of targeted treatment options.
Intratumoral heterogeneity significantly drives disease progression and
complicates therapeutic responses, necessitating advanced analytical approaches
to understand its underlying biology. This review aims to explore the
advancements in single-cell proteomics and their application in uncovering
cellular diversity in TNBC. It highlights innovations in sample preparation,
mass spectrometry-based techniques, and the potential for integrating proteomics
into multi-omics platforms.
METHODS: The review discusses the combination of improved sample preparation
methods and cutting-edge mass spectrometry techniques in single-cell proteomics.
It emphasizes the challenges associated with protein analysis, such as the
inability to amplify proteins akin to transcripts, and examines strategies to
overcome these limitations.
RESULTS: Single-cell proteomics provides a direct link to phenotype and cell
behavior, complementing transcriptomic approaches and offering new insights into
the mechanisms driving TNBC. The integration of advanced techniques has enabled
deeper exploration of cellular heterogeneity and disease mechanisms.
CONCLUSION: Despite the challenges, single-cell proteomics holds immense
potential to evolve into a high-throughput and scalable multi-omics platform.
Addressing existing hurdles will enable deeper biological insights, ultimately
enhancing the diagnosis and treatment of TNBC.
BACKGROUND: MultiGene Panel Testing (MGPT) allows for simultaneous analysis of
multiple cancer-related genes, enabling the identification of pathogenic
variants in genes beyond those that would be analyzed based on a specific
phenotype. However, a relevant fraction of variants so identified has little or
no clinical utility, raising the need for guidance in selecting genes to include
in panels and for interpretation of the results.
METHODS: Taking advantage of seven real paradigmatic cases, we analyze some of
the scenarios where MGPT constitutes a meaningful advantage for diagnosis, as
well as situations where panel use increases the risk of misinterpretation or
complicates result communication and management.
RESULTS: The use of MGPT facilitates prompt diagnosis in carriers of variants in
rare genes (such as NTHL1), which would be diagnosed at a later stage if using a
step-wise approach, as well as in carriers of bi-allelic variants (for instance
in BRCA or MMR genes) leading to atypical phenotypes. Conversely, finding
variants in moderate penetrance genes, such as ATM and CHEK2, may complicate
interpretation and clinical management. Furthermore, for some of the genes
included in MGPT, for instance NBN, the association with cancer risk has been
questioned, leading to potentially misleading results.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, the cases here described provide some examples of
the benefits, as well as risks, involved by the use of MGPT, which may increase
awareness among users and reinforce the need for establishing clear
recommendations on genes to be included and management of the results.
BACKGROUND: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is characterized by high
invasiveness and metastasis potential. Ubiquitin carboxy-terminal hydrolase L1
(UCHL1) is strongly associated with breast cancer progression, although the
underlying mechanisms are largely unknown.
METHODS: The gene expression profiles of TNBC samples were downloaded from the
TCGA database, and ubiquitination enzymes related to immune regulation were
screened. UCHL1 expression in the TNBC tissues and in adipose-derived
mesenchymal stem cells (ADSCs) stimulated in vitro with pro-inflammatory
cytokines were analyzed. Exosomes were isolated from these stimulated ADSCs and
transfected with scrambled (si-NC) or UCHL1-specific (si-UCHL1) siRNA
constructs. TNBC cells were treated with the ADSCs-derived exosomes (ADSCs-Exos)
and then co-cultured with macrophages or T cells. Finally, the tumorigenic
potential of the ADSCs-Exos was evaluated by injecting the exosomes into mice
bearing TNBC xenografts.
RESULTS: UCHL1 was highly expressed in TNBC tissues and the stimulated ADSCs.
The exosomes derived from stimulated ADSCs increased the viability and migration
capacity of TNBC cells in vitro, and significantly increased Ki-67 expression
through UCHL1. Furthermore, ADSCs-Exos induced M2 polarization of THP-1
monocytes by upregulating CD206 and Arg-1, and downregulating TNF-α and iNOS,
and also decreased the proportion of CD3+CD8+ T cells. Mechanistically, UCHL1
regulated the STAT3 and PD-L1 signaling pathways through HDAC6. Exosomes derived
from the control and cytokine-stimulated ADSCs also promoted tumor growth in
vivo, and increased the expression of UCHL1, CD206, HDAC6, STAT3, and PD-L1.
However, UCHL1 knockdown reversed the pro-tumorigenic effects of the
ADSCs-derived exosomes in vivo and in vitro.
CONCLUSION: Pro-inflammatory factors (IFN-γ + TNF-α) stimulating ADSCs-Exos
enhance immune evasion in triple-negative breast cancer by regulating the
HDAC6/STAT3/PD-L1 pathway via UCHL1 transporter. Thus, UCHL1 inhibition may
enhance the response of TNBC to immunotherapy.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is the most common cancer among females. Assessing
self-screening practices for breast cancer patients is vital for developing
targeted interventions. The current study aimed to assess self-screening
practices for breast cancer and associated factors via the theory of planned
behavior constructs among female students in Ethiopian universities.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study design was conducted using the theory of
planned behavior constructs. The data were collected from January 30, 2022, to
February 30, 2022, in Ethiopia. A structured, self-administered questionnaire
was used. The validity and reliability tests were checked to use the
questionnaire in the main study through a pilot test. The data were collected
through online Google Forms by distributing them to university students via
Telegram groups, Imo, emails, and Facebook. The collected data were exported to
SPSS version 26 for analysis. Bivariate analysis was used to identify the
candidate variables for multiple logistic regression (P value < 0.02). Those
variables with a P value less than 0.05 were considered significant predictors
of breast cancer screening practices.
RESULTS: A total of 418 female students participated in the study. The
respondents were aged between 18 and 37 years. In the current study, 318 (76.1%;
95% CI: 72.0, 80.4) university students had good screening practices for breast
cancer. Nonhealth-related departments (AOR = 1.95; 95% CI: 1.11, 3.44), having
training in breast cancer self-examination (AOR = 1.87; 95% CI: 1.04, 3.35),
having a good attitude (AOR = 1.96; 95% CI: 1.11, 3.47), having good behavioral
control (AOR = 4.1; 95% CI: 2.18, 7.71), and having good behavioral intentions
(AOR = 1.88; 95% CI: 1.09, 3.24) were associated with self-screening practices
for breast cancer patients.
CONCLUSION: Designing a theory of planned behavior-based educational
interventions improve self-screening practices for breast cancer among
university female students. These insights could guide the development of future
breast cancer awareness and prevention programs in university settings, with the
goal of increasing early detection rates and lowering the risk of breast cancer.
The study also serves as foundational information for designing future research
using more advanced study design methods.
BACKGROUND: Family members play a crucial role in supporting women with breast
cancer during their recovery. In the complex situation of being an informal
caregiver, their own health and ability to support the patient needs to be
acknowledged. The aim was to explore the experiences, needs and roles of family
members throughout the rehabilitation process of women with breast cancer.
METHODS: A qualitative study was conducted, involving semi-structured individual
telephone interviews with 20 purposefully selected family members of women with
breast cancer (13 men aged 24-79 years, 7 women aged 19-76 years). Data analysis
utilized conventional content analysis and used "casing" as the analysis
technique. The study is part of the ReScreen randomized controlled trial and all
participants gave informed consent.
RESULTS: The interviews revealed significant variation among family members,
leading to the emergence of different typologies based on their reactions and
specific preconditions. These typologies included: 1) The case of the assertive
and confident team leader, 2) The case of the frustrated but persistent
guardian, 3) The case of the reassured bystander, and 4) The case of the
neglected outsider. While not mutually exclusive, the cases demonstrated clear
similarities and differences in whether individuals felt secure or insecure in
the rehabilitation process and their level of involvement in this process. Some
described feelings of being involved and active in the process while others
experienced not being involved and described feelings of abandonment. However,
regardless of their role, family members reported that their own health was
seldom considered by healthcare professionals.
CONCLUSIONS: This study sheds light on the concept of "we-disease," where the
role of a family member is interrelated with factors such as their health
literacy, supporting role, level of involvement, relationship, and identity
during the patient's rehabilitation process. This highlights significant
divergence in whether family members perceive the rehabilitation process as a
collaborative effort or an individual challenge. These perceptions greatly
impact their own well-being and ability to support women with breast cancer,
underscoring the importance of recognizing family members as informal caregivers
and offering tailored support from healthcare professionals when needed.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT03434717. Registered February 15,
2018.
BACKGROUND: CD147 belongs to the immunoglobulin superfamily, also known as
Basigin (BSG), and is a highly glycosylated single transmembrane glycoprotein
present in various tissues. Meta and bioinformatic analyses were used to explore
the correlation between CD147 expression and the clinicopathological
characteristics prognosis of breast cancer.
METHOD: Literature related to breast cancer was retrieved through PubMed and
CNKI databases, and a meta-analysis was conducted using Review Manager 5.2
software.
RESULTS: The meta-analysis revealed that all articles included data on 522
patients with breast cancer and 492 normal tissues. CD147 expression in breast
cancer tissue was higher compared to that in normal tissue([8.92-139.52];
p < 0.00001 I2 = 80%) and negatively correlated with LM, clinical stage,
histological grade, and ER positive expression. Bioinformatic analysis revealed
that the expression of CD147 in breast cancer tissue was higher than that in
normal tissue, and its high expression was closely related to the
clinicopathological characteristics of patients, such as LM, histological
grading, and clinical staging. According to the TIMER database, CD147 expression
was closely related to immune cell infiltration in breast cancer.
CONCLUSION: These results indicated that high CD147 expression might be closely
linked to the occurrence as well as the development of breast cancer, and can
function as a good indicator of prognosis in the future, providing new methods
and ideas for the prevention and treatment of breast cancer.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer brain metastasis (BCBM) prognosis has not been
evaluated dynamically, which may underestimate patient survival. This study
aimed to perform a conditional survival (CS) analysis and develop and validate
an individualized real-time prognostic monitoring model for survivors.
METHODS: The study included patients with BCBM from the Surveillance,
Epidemiology, and End Results database (training group, n = 998) and our
institution (validation group, n = 45) and updated patient overall survival (OS)
over time using the CS method: CS(t2|t1)=OS(t1+t2)OS(t1). Multivariate Cox
regression was used to identify prognostic factors for the nomogram, which
estimated individualized OS. Furthermore, a novel CS-nomogram and its web
version were further developed based on the CS formula.
RESULTS: CS analysis showed that the 5-year OS of BCBM survivors gradually
improved from 13.5% estimated at diagnosis to 26.0%, 39.7%, 57.9%, and 77.6%
(surviving 1-4 years, respectively). Cox regression identified age, marital
status, estrogen receptor status, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2
(Her-2) status, histological grade, surgery, and chemotherapy as significant
factors influencing OS (P < .05). We then constructed and deployed the
CS-nomogram based on the CS formula and the nomogram to predict real-time
prognosis dynamically (https://wh-wang.shinyapps.io/BCBM/). During performance
evaluation, the model performed well in both the training and validation groups.
CONCLUSIONS: CS analysis showed a gradual improvement in prognosis over time for
BCBM survivors. We developed and deployed on the web a novel real-time dynamic
prognostic monitoring system, the CS-nomogram, which provided valuable survival
data for clinical decision-making, patient counseling, and optimal allocation of
healthcare resources.
BACKGROUND: Individuals of reproductive age with cancer may experience
reproductive concerns (RCs) due to impaired fertility and disrupted family
planning, which can negatively impact their quality of life and psychological
well-being. There is limited research on interventions that mitigate the
negative effects of RCs among individuals with cancer.
OBJECTIVE: This systematic review aimed to identify and evaluate the
effectiveness of interventions developed to mitigate RCs among individuals with
cancer.
METHODS: This systematic review was conducted following the Joanna Briggs
Institute (JBI) Manual for Evidence Synthesis and reported in accordance with
the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA)
statement. A systematic search of nine English and Chinese electronic databases
including PubMed, Cochrane Library, CINAHL Plus, Embase, PsycINFO, Web of
Science, Wan Fang Data, Chinese National Knowledge Infrastructure (CNKI), and
SinoMed, was conducted for relevant studies from inception to November 2023.
Intervention studies designed to mitigate RCs among individuals with cancer were
included. Two reviewers independently performed study selection, data
extraction, and quality appraisal where JBI Critical appraisal tools were used.
Narrative syntheses were conducted to summarize the characteristics and
effectiveness of interventions due to high heterogeneity across studies.
RESULTS: Nine studies were included. Interventions were categorized into
psychoeducational interventions (n = 6), couple-based interventions facilitating
open communication and intimate relationships (n = 2), and mindfulness-based
interventions (n = 1). A statistically significant reduction in RCs was observed
in five psychoeducational interventions, two couple-based interventions, and one
mindfulness-based stress reduction intervention. The effect sizes (Cohen's d) of
the interventions on RCs varied substantially from 0.08 to 5.66.
LINKING EVIDENCE TO ACTION: Psychoeducation, couple-based, and mindfulness-based
interventions demonstrated promising findings in mitigating RCs among
individuals with cancer. However, more randomized controlled trials with larger
sample sizes and rigorous designs are warranted to strengthen the current
evidence.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is emerging as a leading cause of mortality among
women and adolescent girls in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). However, there is a lack
of clarity on the enablers and barriers associated with the implementation of
preventive strategies, such as breast self-examination (BSE), particularly among
adolescent girls.
OBJECTIVE: This paper presents a protocol for conducting a systematic review
aiming to synthesise studies on the enablers and barriers to implementing BSE
education programmes among adolescent girls in SSA.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: The systematic review will be conducted from December 2024
to August 2025, following the predefined methodological framework outlined in
the PRISMA guidelines. To gather relevant studies, a comprehensive search will
be conducted across four main online databases, namely PubMed, Scopus, Cochrane
Library and EMBASE, along with other relevant grey literature sources, such as
Google Scholar, to identify pertinent literature on this topic. The screening
process will involve an initial review of titles and abstracts to quickly
identify relevant studies, followed by a thorough assessment of the full-text
versions of selected studies. Two reviewers, working independently, will extract
data and evaluate the risk of bias in the included studies using either the
Joana Briggs Institute's Critical Appraisal tool or Cochrane's Risk of Bias tool
V.2 (RoB 2). The focus of the included studies will be on BSE among adolescents
aged 10 to 19 years of age. Depending on the results of the literature search
and the characteristics of the findings in the selected studies, we will conduct
a meta-analysis if possible. Alternatively, a narrative synthesis will be
conducted. The review will provide empirical evidence to inform health promoters
and policymakers in advocating for BSE, particularly, among adolescent girls in
SSA, with the ultimate goal of mitigating the risk of breast cancer.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: Since this study is based on the analysis of already
published research articles, ethical approval is not required. The results will
be disseminated through peer-reviewed academic publications and presentations,
informing further research and practice regarding BSE education programmes.
BACKGROUND: Higher greenspace exposure has been associated with lower risk of
certain cancers. However, few studies evaluated potential benefits of increasing
population-level exposure to greenspace on cancer disparities. We estimated the
impact of a hypothetical intervention to increase residential greenspace cover
on neighborhood socioeconomic disparities in total, breast, colorectal, lung,
and prostate cancer incidence.
METHODS: Our study included 411,787 cancer-free UK Biobank participants.
Percentage of greenspace around baseline residential addresses (300m, 1000m
distance buffers) was derived by combining domestic gardens and greenspace cover
from the Generalised Land Use Database. We categorized neighborhood
socioeconomic deprivation using the Index of Multiple Deprivation 2010. We
estimated hazard ratios (HR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) of each cancer
associated with greenspace, adjusting for sociodemographic and lifestyle
factors. We additionally adjusted for air pollution in supplementary analyses as
we a-priori hypothesized that it was on the causal pathway between greenspace
and cancer. Further, we used parametric g-computation to calculate the
standardized 10-year risk of each cancer, comparing the least to most
socioeconomically disadvantaged participants, both without any hypothetical
greenspace intervention and under a hypothetical intervention to increase
residential greenspace cover to a favorable threshold (75th percentile amongst
the least socioeconomically deprived participants).
RESULTS: We documented 40,519 incident cases of cancer over 4,210,008
person-years follow-up. An interquartile range increase in greenspace cover
within 300m was associated with lower incidence of total (HR 0.98; 95% CI 0.97,
1.00) and lung (HR 0.96; 95% CI 0.92, 0.99) cancer, and was suggestively
associated with lower prostate and breast cancer incidence, but not colorectal
cancer. Additional adjustment for fine particulate matter air pollution (PM2.5)
weakened lung cancer associations but strengthened breast and prostate cancer
associations (e.g., 300m prostate cancer HR 0.93; 95% CI 0.89, 0.97). The
hypothetical intervention to increase greenspace (300m) resulted in 1.3 fewer
total cancer cases per 1000 (95% CI 1.0, 1.6) in the most compared to least
deprived group, a 23% reduction in the socioeconomic disparity gap.
DISCUSSION: Higher residential greenspace cover was associated with lower total,
breast, lung, and prostate cancer incidence. Policies to increase residential
greenspace cover may reduce the risk of certain cancers, particularly among
socioeconomically disadvantaged groups.
BACKGROUND: In patients diagnosed withestrogen receptor (ER)-positive, human
epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-negative advanced breast cancer, bone
metastasesemerge as theprimary siteofsignificant tumor burden. Cyclin-dependent
kinase 4/6 (CDK4/6i) inhibitorsare thegold standard in this clinical scenario,
while radiotherapy (RT) represents a valuable addition. However, data on the
efficacy of this combination remain scarce. We aimed to evaluate efficacy of RT
in bone metastatic breast cancer patients treated with CDK4/6 inhibitors.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: 398 patients (pts) with ER-positive HER2-negative breast
cancer with bone metastases treated with CDK4/6i between 2018-2024 were
analyzed. A total of 114 pts received 177 bone RT concurrently with CDK4/6i or
within 6 months before CDK4/6i initiation, including 34 courses of
stereotactic-body RT and 143 courses of conventional RT.
RESULTS: The median progression-free survival (PFS) in pts who received bone RT
was 31.0 months, compared to 26.3 months in pts without bone RT. The 2-y PFS for
pts with bone RT was 57.1 % [95 % CI: 46.3-66.6 %] vs. 53.2 % [95 % CI:
46.3-59.6 %] for patients without bone RT (p = 0.51). The median overall
survival (OS) for pts who received bone RT was 49.1 months, compared to
40.5 months for pts without bone RT. The 3-y OS for pts with bone RT was 63.7 %
[95 % CI: 51.5-73.5 %] vs. 55.0 % [95 % CI 46.6-62.6 %] for pts without bone RT
(p = 0.50). The 3-y local control for irradiated patients was 86.9 % [95 % CI
72.2-94.1 %].
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, we present the largest cohort published to date of
breast cancer patients who received CDK4/6i alongside bone-directed RT. Although
the observed differences in survival were not statistically significant, RT
remains a viable treatment modality in metastatic breast cancer in some
patients.
BACKGROUND: Metastasis is a major contributor to mortality in patients with
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC); effective treatment is currently
lacking. Erianin, a bioactive ingredient of traditional Chinese medicine,
Dendrobium chrysotoxum, has anti-tumor activity against multiple human tumors.
However, the effect and associated underlying mechanism of Erianin on ESCC
antimetastasis remain unclear.
PURPOSE: To investigate the anti-metastatic properties of Erianin in ESCC both
in vitro and in vivo and associated molecular mechanisms.
METHODS: Wound healing assay, Transwell assay, CCK-8 assay,
immunohistochemistry, and lung metastasis mouse model were carried out to
examine ESCC cell migration and viability in vitro and in vivo. Drug affinity
responsive target stability (DARTS), cellular thermal migration assay (CETSA),
molecular docking, and Surface plasmon resonance (SPR) assay were used to
confirm Erianin binding to ovarian tumor ubiquitin aldehyde-binding protein 1
(OTUB1) protein. Protein stability assay, cell transfection, and western
blotting were used to confirm Erianin-mediated degradation of OTUB1 and Snail
via the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. qRT-PCR and western blotting were used to
assess OTUB1expression in ESCC tissues.
RESULTS: Erianin suppressed the migration/invasion of ESCC cells without
modulating cell viability in vitro and in vivo, bound to OTUB1 through DARTS,
CETSA, and molecular docking, and SPR assay, and enhanced OTUB1 degradation via
the ubiquitin-proteasome system. Moreover, Erianin inhibited the ESCC
epithelial-mesenchymal transition by enhancing the ubiquitination and
degradation of Snail via targeting OTUB1.
CONCLUSION: Erianin inhibited ESCC metastasis through ubiquitination and
degradation of Snail via targeting OTUB1. Our findings suggest Erianin as a
novel OTUB1 inhibitor for preventing ESCC metastasis.
BACKGROUND: Breast mucinous carcinoma (MC) is typically positive for estrogen
receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR) expressions and negative for human
epidermal growth factor receptor (HER2) overexpression. HER2 positive MC is a
rare entity; its response to neoadjuvant HER2-targeted therapy remains unclear.
METHODS: Four cases of HER2 positive MC and seven cases of HER2 positive
invasive ductal carcinoma with mucinous features (MCF) were identified.
Clinicopathologic features were collected. Patients' germline data was gathered
if available. Tumor's response to HER2-directed treatment were recorded and
compared.
RESULTS: Two HER2 positive MCs were treated with neoadjuvant HER2-directed
treatment and showed no response in the subsequent surgical resection specimens
including one positive lymph node showing no treatment effect. One patient had
upfront surgery. The fourth patient presented with advanced stage and showed
progression on HER2-directed treatment. Six HER2 positive MCFs received
neoadjuvant HER2-directed therapy; two cases showed complete pathologic response
and four had only minimal residual carcinomas in the breast. Two cases with
positive lymph nodes had complete response in the lymph nodes. The seventh
patient presented at an advanced stage and was stable on HER2-directed
treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that HER2 positive MCs may be resistant to
HER2-directed treatment. This is in contrast with the excellent treatment
response observed in HER2 positive MCFs. It is important to report mucinous
carcinoma percentage in biopsies on HER2 positive tumors as it may be related to
treatment response. Further investigation of the underlying mechanisms may help
optimize clinical management in this patient population.
BACKGROUND: Dietary patterns promoting chronic inflammation, including the
empirical dietary inflammatory pattern (EDIP), have been associated with certain
cancers. Investigating whether this dietary pattern is associated with breast
cancer-where the role of inflammation is less well-defined-could provide
valuable insights and potentially improve strategies for preventing this cancer.
METHODS: We prospectively followed 76,386 women from Nurses' Health Study (NHS,
1984-2018) and 92,886 women from Nurses' Health Study II (NHSII, 1991-2019).
Diet was assessed by food frequency questionnaires (FFQs) every 4 years,
starting at baseline. The inflammatory potential of diet was evaluated using the
validated EDIP based on plasma CRP, IL-6, and TNFα-R2. Higher scores indicate
higher dietary inflammatory potential. Hazard ratios and 95%CIs of overall and
subtypes of breast cancer were estimated using multivariable-adjusted Cox
regression models.
RESULTS: During 4,490,842 person-years of follow-up, we documented 11,026 breast
cancer cases. Women in the highest, compared with the lowest, EDIP quintile were
at higher breast cancer risk (HRQ5vs.Q1=1.12; 95% CI, 1.05, 1.19;
P-trend<0.001). The association was stronger for ER-negative tumors
(HRQ5vs.Q1=1.29; 95% CI, 1.09, 1.53; P-trend=0.003). Also, we observed that the
association of EDIP with breast cancer risk differed by molecular subtype, with
the strongest association observed with basal-like tumors (HRQ5vs.Q1=1.80; 95%
CI, 1.20, 2.71; P-trend=0.004).
CONCLUSIONS: Higher EDIP scores were associated with a modestly increased risk
of breast cancer, which was more pronounced for ER-negative and basal-like
breast tumors. These results support the hypothesis that diet-related
inflammation plays a role in breast cancer etiology, particularly tumors lacking
hormone receptors.
BACKGROUND: Vepdegestrant (ARV-471) is an oral PROteolysis TArgeting Chimera
(PROTAC) estrogen receptor (ER) degrader.
METHODS: This phase 1 study (NCT05463952) investigated safety, pharmacokinetics,
and antitumor activity of vepdegestrant in Japanese patients with ER-positive
(ER+)/human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-negative (HER2-) advanced breast
cancer at the 200-mg once daily (QD) recommended phase 3 dose. Eligible patients
had ER+/HER2- advanced breast cancer resistant to standard therapy, with no
standard therapy available, or had received two or more prior endocrine
therapies in any setting. The primary endpoint was dose-limiting toxicities
(DLTs) in cycle 1; secondary endpoints included safety, pharmacokinetics, and
antitumor activity.
RESULTS: Six female patients (median age, 58 [range: 47-62] years) were treated.
For advanced disease, three (50.0%) patients received three or more prior
regimens and five (83.3%) patients received prior cyclin-dependent kinase 4/6
inhibitors. At data cutoff, median treatment duration was 9.8 (range: 6-28)
weeks; two patients remained on treatment. No DLTs were observed. Four (66.7%)
patients experienced adverse events; none led to dose reduction or
discontinuation. Four (66.7%) patients had treatment-related adverse events; all
were grade 1 except anemia (grade 2). Geometric mean maximum plasma
concentration and 24-h area under the plasma concentration-time curve of
vepdegestrant were 630.9 ng/mL and 10,400 ng∙hr/mL after a single dose and
1056 ng/mL and 18,310 ng∙hr/mL after multiple doses. Two (33.3%) patients
demonstrated stable disease at week 24.
CONCLUSION: Vepdegestrant 200 mg QD was well tolerated in Japanese patients with
ER+/HER2- advanced breast cancer with no notable differences in pharmacokinetics
from Western patients.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT05463952 (date of
registration: July 19, 2022).
BACKGROUND: Following surgery, women with breast cancer (BC) frequently
experience emotional and physiological negative consequences.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effect of a nurse-led mobile app (NL-Mapp)
intervention on quality of life (QoL) in patients after surgery for BC.
METHODS: This single-center, 12-month, nonrandomized controlled trial, with 2
parallel groups, represents the final stage of 3-step research. In this study,
women were assigned to either the intervention (n = 45) or control (n = 45)
group. The intervention group participated in the NL-Mapp, whereas participants
in the control group received standard care. The main outcomes were measured
using the Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy-Breast at 3 time points
(baseline and 1 and 12 months after the intervention). Clinical Trial number:
BACKGROUND: Eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE) is a chronic, inflammatory disease of
the esophagus. Chronic inflammation has been linked to cancer development. We
aimed to study the potential association between EoE and later cancer diagnosis.
METHODS: In this nationwide population-based cohort study, we identified 1580
individuals with EoE diagnosed between 1990-2017 through Sweden's 28 pathology
departments. Up to five general population reference individuals were matched on
age and sex (n = 7533). A Cox regression analysis estimated adjusted hazard
ratios (aHRs) for cancer up until December 31, 2020. To reduce potential
intrafamilial confounding, we also compared EoE individuals with their
unaffected siblings.
RESULTS: During a median follow-up of 7 years, 47 individuals with EoE
(3.9/1000 person-years) developed cancer versus 183 (3.2/1000 person-years)
reference individuals. This corresponded to a non-significant aHR of 1.11 (95%
CI = 0.80-1.53). Incidence rates were independent of budesonide and proton-pump
inhibitor use. Individuals with EoE however did have an increased risk of
esophageal cancer where two EoE versus one reference individual were diagnosed
(aHR = 25.20; 95% CI = 2.28-278.80), and also Barrett's esophagus risk was also
increased in EoE (HR = 18.18; 95% CI = 6.75-48.95). Non-esophageal
gastrointestinal (GI) cancer occurred in 11 EoE versus 24 reference individuals:
aHR = 2.03 (95% CI = 0.99-4.18). We found no increased risk of cancers from the
skin (EoE n = 10), lung (n = 0), breast (n = 4), or blood (n = 0). Sibling
analyses supported these findings.
CONCLUSION: We did not find any overall association between EoE and cancer
development. EoE was associated with esophageal cancer, but this was very rare
with wide confidence interval and few cases therefore we urge caution with
generalization of these findings.
BACKGROUND: Increased access to and indications for genetic testing will lead to
more women undergoing risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy (RRSO), with a
potential impact on sexual function.
AIM: Our objective was to prospectively investigate (1) sexual function in women
with pathogenic variant (PV) in BRCA1/2 genes, before and 1 year after RRSO, and
to compare with a healthy age-matched control group and (2) to study if
testosterone levels correlate with sexual functioning after RRSO.
METHODS: A prospective observational follow-up study of 43 BRCA1/2-PV carriers
planned for RRSO and 73 healthy-age matched controls. Data including personal
medical history, the Female Sexual Function Index (FSFI) and blood samples for
analysis of testosterone by tandem mass spectrometry and free androgen index
(FAI) were collected before and 1 year after surgery or at inclusion (controls).
OUTCOMES: Sexual function and testosterone levels following RRSO.
RESULTS: Median age in the RRSO group was 42 years at baseline, 55.8% were
premenopausal and 53.5% had a history of breast cancer. The RRSO group had
significantly lower median FSFI total score (P < .001), lower scores of all 6
FSFI domains (P < .001), as well as a higher proportion of female sexual
dysfunction (FSD) (P < .001) compared to the control group at 1 year after
surgery. In the RRSO group, users of menopausal hormone therapy (MHT) had a
significantly higher median FSFI total score compared with the nonusers both at
baseline (P = .023) and follow-up (P = .010). The proportion of FSD was
significantly higher in the non-MHT group at both baseline (P = .041) and
follow-up (P = .009). FAI was significantly lower in the RRSO group when
compared to the controls at 1-year follow-up (P = .041); however, no significant
correlations between testosterone levels and FSFI scores were found.
CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS: The results highlight the need to counsel BRCA1/2-PV
carriers before RRSO and offer a structured follow-up and support addressing
sexual function and impact of MHT use.
STRENGTHS AND LIMITATIONS: The main strength of this study is its prospective
design with age-matched controls. Limitation is a small sample size.
CONCLUSION: Our findings show that sexual function deteriorated 1 year after
RRSO independent of testosterone levels, and the proportion with impaired sexual
function was higher compared to healthy age-matched controls.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer (BC) is the most common cancer and is highly
morphologically and molecularly heterogeneous. Neuron-specific gene family
member 1 (NSG1) is a small single-channel transmembrane protein that consists of
185 amino acids and has been reported in a variety of tumours in recent years.
However, the role of NSG1 in BC is unclear.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to explore the role of NSG1 in the pathogenesis and
development of BC and its potential as a prognostic marker for BC.
METHODS: This study analysed data from The Cancer Genome Atlas database and the
Gene Expression Omnibus database to determine the expression level and
prognostic value of NSG1 messenger ribonucleic acid in BC. Using this data, we
constructed a clinical risk model. Immunohistochemistry was performed in
combination with a clinical cohort of 192 patients with BC to explore the NSG1
protein expression in BC. Enrichment analysis was used to predict the biological
function of NSG1 in BC. To analyse the correlation between NSG1 and the BC
immune microenvironment, a single-cell analysis of NSG1 expression and cells in
BC was performed. Kaplan‒Meier curves and Cox regression analysis were utilised
to identify the relationship between the expression of NSG1 protein and
clinicopathological features and prognosis.
RESULTS: Neuron-specific gene family member 1 is highly expressed in patients
with early BC, and its expression suggests a good prognosis for patients with
BC. Neuron-specific gene family member 1 is involved in the T-cell receptor
complex in BC and is associated with CD8 T cells in the BC immune
microenvironment and may induce M1 polarisation of macrophages.
CONCLUSION: Neuron-specific gene family member 1 is a biomarker of good
prognosis in BC. It is associated with the immune microenvironment of BC and may
be a potential therapeutic target.
BACKGROUND: Previous observational research has indicated a correlation between
Parkinson's disease (PD) and multiple cancers; but the causality remains
unclear. Thus, we utilized Mendelian randomization (MR) analysis to explore the
potential causal link between PD and various cancers.
METHODS: We conducted a bidirectional two-sample Mendelian randomization (TSMR)
of genetic variants associated with PD and 14 types of cancers. Summary
statistics on PD and 14 types of cancers were obtained from the International
Parkinson's Disease Genomics Consortium and the study by Sakaue et al. The
primary method employed was inverse variance weighted (IVW), complemented by
multiple sensitivity analyses to evaluate heterogeneity and pleiotropy. The
false discovery rate (FDR) was employed to control the false positive rate of
multiple hypothesis testing.
RESULTS: Following rigorous sensitivity analyses and corrections, our findings
revealed suggestive associations between PD and certain cancers. We observed
that PD decreases the risk of gastric cancer and colorectal cancer (OR = 0.936,
95% CI = 0.881-0.995, p = 0.034, P FDR = 0.239; OR = 0.955, 95%
CI = 0.912-0.999, p = 0.046, P FDR = 0.215), while increasing the risk of breast
cancer (OR = 1.043, 95% CI = 1.004-1.084, p = 0.029, P FDR = 0.402). Notably, we
found no evidence supporting a reverse causal relationship. Additionally, in the
reverse pathway, skin cancer demonstrated a suggestive causal relationship with
PD (OR = 0.913, 95% CI = 0.857-0.973, p = 0.005, P FDR = 0.066).
CONCLUSION: Our MR analysis provides evidence supporting unidirectional
suggestive causal relationships between PD and certain cancers. These findings
enrich our comprehension of the intricate interplay between PD and cancer,
warranting further investigation into the underlying biological mechanisms.
BACKGROUND: The novel nanomaterials PNA-TN (PN) and PNA-TN-Dox (PND) have been
shown to have strong inhibitory effects on breast cancer; however, it is unclear
whether PN and PND have anti-head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC)
activity, and their potential mechanisms of activity are unknown. So, our study
aims to explore the therapeutic effects of PN and PND on HNSCC and their
possible mechanisms.
METHODS: We used a series of phenotypic research to evaluate the effects of
PN + Laser (L) and PND + L on the biological function of HNSCC cells in vitro
and in vivo. We subsequently used mechanism research to examine changes in mRNA
and protein expression related to apoptosis, epithelial‒mesenchymal transition
(EMT), and the JNK signalling pathway.
RESULTS: Our study revealed that PN and PND have strong inhibitory effects on
HNSCC cells both in vitro and in vivo. In vitro, PN and PND significantly
inhibited the proliferation, migration, invasion and EMT ability of HNSCC cells
and promoted apoptosis; the inhibitory effect in the PND + L group was
significantly greater than that in the PN + L group. In vivo, both treatments
led to significant reductions in tumour volume and weight. Notably, the tumour
volume and weight in the PND + L group were significantly lower than those in
the PN + L group. Mechanism research confirmed that PN + L activated the
expression of apoptosis-related proteins and inhibited the expression of
EMT-related proteins via the JNK pathway. Furthermore, the anti-HNSCC effect of
PN + L was blocked after the use of a JNK pathway inhibitor.
CONCLUSION: Treatment with PN + L or PND + L significantly inhibited the
malignant progress of HNSCC cells, and the therapeutic effect of PND + L was
significantly stronger than that of PN + L. The JNK signalling pathway is a key
mechanism by which PN exerts its anti-HNSCC activity.
BACKGROUND: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) has pronounced stemness that is
associated with relapse. N6-methyladenosine (m6A) plays a crucial role in
shaping cellular behavior by modulating transcript expression. However, the role
of m6A in TNBC stemness, as well as the mechanisms governing its abundance, has
yet to be elucidated.
METHODS: We analyzed proteomic and transcriptomic data derived from breast
cancer cohorts, with an emphasis on m6A regulators. To unravel the role of m6A
in TNBC, we employed RNA sequencing, methylated RNA immunoprecipitation
sequencing, RNA immunoprecipitation, chromatin immunoprecipitation, and
luciferase reporter assays with mesenchymal stem-like (MSL) TNBC models. The
clinical relevance was validated using human tissue microarrays and publicly
accessible databases.
RESULTS: Our findings indicate that the global level of m6A modification in MSL
TNBC is downregulated primarily due to the loss of methyltransferase-like 14
(METTL14). The diminished m6A modification is crucial for the maintenance of
TNBC stemness, as it increases the expression of yes-associated protein 1 (YAP1)
by blocking YTH domain-containing family protein 2 (YTHDF2)-mediated transcript
decay, thereby promoting the activation of Hippo-independent YAP1 signaling.
YAP1 is essential for sustaining the stemness regulated by METTL14. Furthermore,
we demonstrated that the loss of METTL14 expression results from lysine-specific
demethylase 1 (LSD1)-mediated removal of histone H3 lysine 4 methylation at the
promoter region, which is critical for LSD1-driven stemness in TNBC.
CONCLUSION: These findings present an epi-transcriptional mechanism that
maintains Hippo-independent YAP1 signaling and plays a role in preserving the
undifferentiated state of TNBC, which indicates the potential for targeting the
LSD1-METTL14 axis to address TNBC stemness.
BACKGROUND: Black/African American women with breast cancer have a
disproportionately higher risk of mortality compared to other race groups,
although their overall incidence of disease is lower. Despite this, advance care
planning (ACP) and consequent code status documentation remain low in this
vulnerable patient population. Code status orders (i.e., Full code, Do Not
Attempt Resuscitation [DNAR], Do Not Intubate [DNI]) allow consideration of
patient preferences regarding the use of aggressive treatments, such as
cardiopulmonary resuscitation and intubation. The aim of this study is to
characterize presence of code status orders and determine whether race affects
code status documentation after the first encounter for breast cancer.
METHODS: Data were derived from 7524 women with breast cancer from the
University of Chicago Medical Center (UCMC) between 2016 and 2021. Cox
regression was used to estimate the effects of race and adjusted for age,
ethnicity, inpatient stays, metastatic breast cancer, marital status, and body
mass index.
RESULTS: The sample included 60.5% White, 3.6% Asian/Mideast Indian, 28.9%
Black/African American, and 7.0% other or unknown race. Results indicate that
code status orders after the first breast cancer encounter were uncommon (7.2%).
Black/African American race (HR = 2.74; 95% CI: 1.75, 4.28) emerged as a
significant factor associated with any code status orders compared to other race
groups even when adjusting for covariates.
CONCLUSIONS: Code status documentation in this sample of women with breast
cancer was low overall, yet rates were higher among Black/African American
patients compared to other race groups. In fact, race remains a significant
predictor of code status documentation even when accounting for indirect
measures of cancer severity. This could be denoting the racial disparities
(e.g., higher cancer malignancy such as triple negative breast cancer) in breast
cancer mortality risk. Future research is needed to identify factors unique to
Black/African American women that would increase code status documentation so
that goal concordant care can be prioritized among patients with breast cancer.
BACKGROUND: There may be potential associations between various pathogens,
antibody immune responses, and breast cancer (BC), but the specific mechanisms
and causal relationships remain unclear.
METHODS: First, multiple Mendelian randomization (MR) methods were used for
univariable MR analysis to explore potential causal relationships between 34
antibody immune responses (related to 12 pathogens), 46 antibody immune
responses (related to 13 pathogens), antibody responses post-COVID-19
vaccination, 731 immune cell types, and various BC subtypes (including overall
BC, ER-positive, ER-negative, Luminal A, Luminal B, Luminal B HER2-negative,
HER2-positive, and triple-negative BC). The primary results were then subjected
to reverse MR analysis, heterogeneity testing using Cochran's Q, and horizontal
pleiotropy testing. Robust findings were further used to design mediation
pathways involving antibody immune responses, immune cells, and BC. After
adjusting the effect estimates using multivariable MR (MVMR), a two-step
mediation analysis was conducted to explore mediation pathways and mediation
proportions. Finally, linkage disequilibrium score regression (LDSC) was applied
to analyze the genetic correlation between phenotypes along mediation pathways,
and cross-phenotype association analysis (CPASSOC) was performed to identify
pleiotropic SNPs among three phenotypes along these pathways. Bayesian
colocalization tests were conducted on pleiotropic SNPs using the
multiple-trait-coloc (moloc).
RESULTS: We identified potential causal relationships between 15 antibody immune
responses to 8 pathogens (Hepatitis B virus, Herpes Simplex Virus 2, Human
Herpesvirus 6, Polyomavirus 2, BK polyomavirus, Cytomegalovirus, Helicobacter
pylori, Chlamydia trachomatis), 250 immune cell phenotypes, and various BC
subtypes. MVMR-adjusted mediation analysis revealed four potential mediation
pathways. LDSC results showed no significant genetic correlation between
phenotypes pairwise. CPASSOC analysis identified two potential mediation
pathways with common pleiotropic SNPs (rs12121677, rs281378, rs2894250).
However, none of these SNPs passed the Bayesian colocalization test by moloc.
These results excluded horizontal pleiotropy, stabilizing MR analysis results.
CONCLUSION: This study utilized MR methods to analyze potential causal
relationships between various antibody immune responses, immune cell types, and
BC subtypes, identifying four potential regulatory mediation pathways. The
findings of this study offer potential targets and research directions for
virus-related and immunotherapy-related studies, providing a certain level of
theoretical support. However, limitations such as GWAS sample size constraints
and unclear specific pathophysiological mechanisms need further improvement and
validation in future studies.
BACKGROUND: Regional lymph nodes that are fixed and fused into clusters or those
exhibiting metastases outside the regional lymph nodes are generally classified
as stage IV (M1) or unresectable. Patients with such nodes almost always need
pre-operative treatment so that they can undergo surgical resection. Combining
immunotherapy with trastuzumab and chemotherapy significantly improved the
prognosis of HER-2 positive gastric/gastroesophageal junction (G/GEJ) cancer.
However, very few reports are available on the role of immunotherapy in
converting patients with unresectable cancer to resectable cancer.
METHODS: In this study, we report on four patients with GC who were
preoperatively treated with a combination of sintilimab, trastuzumab, and
chemotherapy at Hubei Cancer Hospital, China, from January 2022 to October 2023.
Both preoperative and postoperative clinical and pathological characteristics of
each patient were analyzed. The preoperative tumor stage was cT4N3M1.
RESULTS: Postoperative pathological results showed that two patients achieved
pathological complete remission (pCR), while the pathological stage in the other
two patients decreased to ypT1N0M0 and ypT2N0M0. None of them had nerve or
vascular invasion. None of the patients had recurrences or metastases until the
last follow-up (October 2024) after primary surgery. The present case report
suggests that a combination of immunotherapy comprising trastuzumab and
chemotherapy can improve the efficiency of conversion therapy for patients with
HER-2 positive locally advanced G/GEJ cancer. This study also demonstrates the
safety of immune checkpoint inhibitors in a conversional treatment approach.
CONCLUSION: We showed that a pathological complete response (pCR) can be
obtained even with unresectable advanced GC through treatment with sintilimab
combined with neoadjuvant chemotherapy and trastuzumab.
BACKGROUND: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is one of the most
aggressive cancers, highly resistant to standard chemotherapy and immunotherapy.
Regulatory T cells (Tregs) expressing tumor necrosis factor α receptor 2 (TNFR2)
contribute to immunosuppression in PDAC. Treg infiltration correlates with poor
survival and tumor progression in patients with PDAC. We hypothesized that TNFR2
inhibition using a blocking monoclonal antibody (mAb) could shift the
Treg-effector T cell balance in PDAC, thus enhancing antitumoral responses.
METHOD: To support this hypothesis, we first described TNFR2 expression in a
cohort of 24 patients with PDAC from publicly available single-cell analysis
data. In orthotopic and immunocompetent mouse models of PDAC, we also described
the immune environment of PDAC after immune cell sorting and single-cell
analysis. The modifications of the immune environment before and after
anti-TNFR2 mAb treatment were evaluated as well as the effect on tumor
progression.
RESULTS: Patients with PDAC exhibited elevated TNFR2 expression in Treg, myeloid
cells and endothelial cells and lower level in tumor cells. By flow cytometry
and single-cell RNA-seq analysis, we identified two Treg populations in
orthotopic mouse models: Resting and activated Tregs. The anti-TNFR2 mAb
selectively targeted activated tumor-infiltrating Tregs, reducing T cell
exhaustion markers in CD8+ T cells. However, anti-TNFR2 treatment alone had
limited efficacy in activating CD8+ T cells and only slightly reduced the tumor
growth. The combination of the anti-TNFR2 mAb with agonistic anti-CD40 mAb
promoted stronger T cell activation, tumor growth inhibition, and improved
survival and immunological memory in PDAC-bearing mice.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that combining a CD40 agonist with a TNFR2
antagonist represents a promising therapeutic strategy for patients with PDAC.
BACKGROUND: BRCA1/2 genes play a critical role in genome stability and DNA
repair. In animal models, loss of cardiomyocyte-specific BRCA1/2 is associated
with DNA damage, apoptosis, cardiac dysfunction, and mortality following
anthracycline exposure. However, whether these preclinical findings translate to
humans remains unclear.
OBJECTIVE: Assess the impact of germline BRCA1/2 (gBRCA1/2) status on
anthracyclines-induced cardiotoxicity (AIC) in patients with early breast cancer
and no prior anti-HER2 therapy.
METHODS: This single-center retrospective/prospective cohort study focused on
early breast cancer patients, treated with anthracycline-based chemotherapy in
the neo/adjuvant setting, no prior anti-HER2 therapy, and known gBRCA1/2 status,
normal baseline left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), and no previous
cardiovascular disease. Follow-up assessments involved myocardial dysfunction
blood biomarkers (MDBB), transthoracic echocardiography (TTE), and quality of
life (QoL) questionnaires. The primary objective was LVEF changes comparing
BRCA1/2 mutation carriers (gBRCA1/2m) vs non-carriers (gBRCA1/2wt). Secondary
objectives included differences in MDBB and QoL.
RESULTS: A total of 137 patients were included (103 gBRCA1/2wt and 34
gBRCA1/2m). Baseline characteristics were similar between groups. Compared to
baseline, LVEF% reduction was -4.7[-12.0, 0.0] vs -9.5[-18.0, -5.0] in
gBRCA1/2wt vs gBRCA1/2m, (P = .027). After adjusting for confounders, the
difference in reduction in LVEF remained statistically significant at -4.5
[95%CI, -8.6, -0.4; P = .032]. No differences between MDBB (C-reactive protein,
hsTnI, NT-proBNP, D-Dimer, ST-2, or Galectine-3) or QoL (MLHFQ and EQ5-D index)
were detected.
CONCLUSIONS: gBRCA1/2m patients could represent a higher-risk population for
AIC. gBRCA1/2 status should be one of the factors to consider in deciding on
adjuvant anthracycline necessity. This population could benefit from a
cardio-oncology closer follow-up and cardioprotective strategies.
BACKGROUND: Studies exploring the role of ferroptosis in the pathogenesis of
breast cancer have proliferated over the past decade, especially in 2023, with a
staggering 217 publications in related studies. However, there are still
significant gaps in comprehensive scientometric analysis and mapping of
scientific studies, especially in terms of temporal and study area tracking,
principal investigators, and the emergence of new hotspots.
OBJECTIVE: This study aims to summarize the role of ferroptosis in the
development of breast cancer and the latest research results on the
ferroptosis-targeted treatment of breast cancer and to use bibliometric methods
to draw a visual map to explore future research trends.
METHODS: On May 11, 2024, this study updated the research progress related to
ferroptosis and breast cancer over the past 11 years by retrieving data from
January 1, 2014, to May 1, 2024, from the Web of Science database. In this
research, many scientific analysis software including VOSviewer, chorddiag R
Language Pack, Scimago Graphica, Citespace 6.3.R1, Cluster Profiler, enrichplot,
ggplot2 R Language Pack, Cytoscape, and STRING online platform are used to make
in-depth scientific analysis and visualization of the measurement results.
RESULTS: Statistical analysis of these data showed that China accounted for
74.43% of the total publications, highlighting China's dominant role in research
on the relationship between ferroptosis and breast cancer. Several research
institutions, including Sun Yat-sen University, Zhejiang University, and
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, have achieved impressive results. Efferth, Thomas
is the most prominent author in this field and has the highest number of
publications in the subfield of oncology. This study clearly shows that
ferroptosis plays a crucial role in the development of triple-negative breast
cancer, hepatocellular carcinoma, glioma, leukemia, mitochondrial disease,
lymphoma, bladder tumors, lung adenocarcinoma, and esophageal tumors.
CONCLUSION: This study provides a comprehensive bibliometric evaluation that
deepens our understanding of the role of ferroptosis in the pathogenesis of
breast cancer and the current status of targeting ferroptosis for treating
breast cancer. Thus, it helps researchers in related fields explore new research
directions by comprehensively extracting important information and research
hotspots.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer remains a leading cause of cancer-related mortality
worldwide. Patient self-management plays a pivotal role in enhancing outcomes
and quality of life for individuals affected by this disease. This study
employed bibliometric and visual analysis techniques utilizing CiteSpace to
elucidate the current status and research hotspots in breast cancer patient
self-management from January 1, 2005, to August 31, 2023.
METHODS: A comprehensive search was conducted in the Web of Science Core
Collection (WoSCC). The retrieved literature was subjected to visualization and
analysis using CiteSpace, focusing on publication timeline, article count,
geographical distribution, institutional affiliations, journal sources,
reference co-citation networks, and keyword analysis.
RESULTS: The analysis encompassed 1413 English-language documents. The United
States emerged as the most prolific contributor, while the University of Toronto
demonstrated the highest institutional output. The two-map overlay revealed
prominent citation paths, indicating strong interconnections between
publications in "Medicine, Medicine, Clinical" and "Health, Nursing, Medicine,"
as well as "Psychology, Education, Health" and "Health, Nursing, Medicine." The
most frequently co-cited reference was "Self-Management: Enabling and Empowering
Patients Living with Cancer as a Chronic Illness." High-frequency keywords
identified included quality of life, chronic disease, self-management, patient
education, randomized controlled trials, education, and intervention. These
keywords formed 11 distinct clusters related to intervention content,
methodologies, outcome indicators, and emerging research trends. Keyword burst
analysis predicted future research hotspots focusing on patient needs,
psychological distress, Internet technology, and mobile applications.
CONCLUSIONS: Research in breast cancer self-management is experiencing
significant growth. Enhanced collaboration between countries, regions, and
institutions is imperative. Further investigation is warranted, particularly in
the domains of "quality of life," "patient education," and "mobile health."
These findings provide valuable insights to guide future research directions in
this critical field.
BACKGROUND: This systematic review aims to explore the effect of traditional
Chinese medicine combined with chemotherapy on the clinical efficacy of breast
cancer postoperative patients, providing theoretical basis for the treatment of
breast cancer postoperative patients with traditional Chinese medicine.
METHODS: A comprehensive search was conducted on databases such as China
National Knowledge Infrastructure, Wanfang Database, VIP Database, Chinese
Biomedical Literature Database, PubMed, and the Cochrane Library from their
inception to August 2023 to screen RCTs comparing the effect of traditional
Chinese medicine combined with chemotherapy with that of chemotherapy alone on
the clinical efficacy of breast cancer postoperative patients. The included
literature was systematically reviewed.
RESULTS: A total of 22 RCTs involving 1834 breast cancer postoperative patients
were finally included, with 918 patients in the traditional Chinese medicine
combined with chemotherapy group (treatment group) and 916 patients in the
chemotherapy alone group (control group). Meta-analysis showed that compared
with the control group, therapeutical effective rate, CD3, CD4, CD4/CD8, and
adverse reactions in the treatment group were all improved, and the incidence of
leukopenia and thrombocytopenia after chemotherapy were all reduced, with
statistically significant differences.
CONCLUSION: Traditional Chinese medicine combined with chemotherapy is superior
to chemotherapy alone in improving the therapeutical effective rate after breast
cancer surgery, reducing chemotherapy adverse reactions, and enhancing immune
function.
BACKGROUND: Serpin B9 is highly expressed in breast cancer, melanoma, and
various malignant cells and inhibits NK cell killing through the Serpin B9-GrB
axle. However, the current studies have only validated the role of Serpin B9 in
vivo and vitro, and lack of systematic studies on the expression of Serpin B9 in
patients' tumor tissues and its prognostic implications. In this study, we
propose to further validate the role of Serpin B9 by comparing its expression
level in tissues of lung adenocarcinoma patients and its correlation with the
efficacy of immunotherapy.
METHODS: This study included 200 patients with LUAD between Feb 2022 and Feb
2023. IHC scoring assessed Serpin B9 expression in the tumor and adjacent
tissues, with an H-score of 2 as the cutoff value. Patients were divided into
high- and low-expression groups. T-tests were used to compare Serpin B9
expression and treatment efficacy between the tumor and adjacent tissues in both
groups. Baseline characteristics were compared using X2 tests. Prognostic risk
factors were identified using Cox regression and Kaplan-Meier survival curves.
RESULTS: The expression level of Serpin B9 in LUAD tumor tissues are higher than
adjacent tissues and positively correlated with the TNM stage and negative
correlated with PFS in patients with LUAD. Additionally, immunotherapy efficacy
was inversely correlated with Serpin B9 expression.
CONCLUSION: The increased expression of Serpin B9 in LUAD tumor tissues is
negatively linked to prognosis and immunotherapy efficacy. This underscores
their potential as prognostic and therapeutic targets.
BACKGROUND: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive subtype of
breast cancer lacking hormone receptors and HER2 expression, leading to limited
treatment options and poor prognosis. Mitophagy, a selective autophagy process
targeting damaged mitochondria, plays a complex role in cancer progression, yet
its prognostic significance in TNBC is not well understood.
METHODS: This study utilized single-cell RNA sequencing data from the TCGA and
GEO databases to identify mitophagy-related genes (MRGs) associated with TNBC. A
prognostic model was developed using univariate Cox analysis and LASSO
regression. The model was validated across multiple independent cohorts, and
correlations between MRG expression, immune infiltration, and drug sensitivity
were explored.
RESULTS: Nine key MRGs were identified and used to stratify TNBC patients into
high-risk and low-risk groups, with the high-risk group showing significantly
worse survival outcomes. The model demonstrated strong predictive accuracy
across various datasets. Additionally, the study revealed a correlation between
higher MRG expression levels and increased immune cell infiltration, as well as
potential responsiveness to specific chemotherapeutic agents.
CONCLUSION: The mitophagy-related prognostic model offers a novel method for
predicting outcomes in TNBC patients and highlights the role of mitophagy in
influencing the tumor microenvironment, with potential applications in
personalized treatment strategies.
BACKGROUND: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a heterogeneous disease
characterized by high aggressiveness, high malignancy, and poor prognosis
compared to other breast cancer subtypes.
OBJECTIVE: This review aims to explore recent advances in understanding TNBC and
to provide new insights and potential references for clinical treatment.
METHODS: We examined current literature on TNBC to analyze molecular subtypes,
genetic mutations, signaling pathways, mechanisms of drug resistance, and
emerging therapies.
RESULTS: Findings highlight key aspects of TNBC's molecular subtypes, relevant
mutations, and pathways, alongside emerging treatments that target drug
resistance mechanisms.
CONCLUSION: These insights into TNBC pathogenesis may help guide future
therapeutic strategies and improve clinical outcomes for patients with TNBC.
BACKGROUND: Assessment of breast cancer (BC) risk generally relies on
mammography, family history, reproductive history, and genotyping of major
mutations. However, assessing the impact of environmental factors, such as
lifestyle, health-related behavior, or external exposures, is still challenging.
DNA methylation (DNAm), capturing both genetic and environmental effects,
presents a promising opportunity. Previous studies have identified associations
and predicted the risk of BC using DNAm in blood; however, these studies did not
distinguish between genetic and environmental contributions to these DNAm sites.
In this study, associations between DNAm and BC are assessed using paired twin
models, which control for shared genetic and environmental effects, allowing
testing for associations between DNAm and non-shared environmental exposures and
behavior.
RESULTS: Pre-diagnosis blood samples of 32 monozygotic (MZ) and 76 dizygotic
(DZ) female twin pairs discordant for BC were collected at the mean age of 56.0
years, with the mean age at diagnosis 66.8 years and censoring 75.2 years. We
identified 212 CpGs (p < 6.4*10-8) and 15 DMRs associated with BC risk across
all pairs using paired Cox proportional hazard models. All but one of the BC
risks associated with CpGs were hypomethylated, and 198/212 CpGs had their DNAm
associated with BC risk independent of genetic effects. According to previous
literature, at least five of the top CpGs were related to estrogen signaling.
Following a comprehensive two-sample Mendelian randomization analysis, we found
evidence supporting a dual causal impact of DNAm at cg20145695 (gene body of
NXN, rs480351) with increased risk for estrogen receptor positive BC and
decreased risk for estrogen receptor negative BC.
CONCLUSION: While causal effects of DNAm on BC risk are rare, most of the
identified CpGs associated with the risk of BC appear to be independent of
genetic effects. This suggests that DNAm could serve as a valuable biomarker for
environmental risk factors for BC, and may offer potential benefits as a
complementary tool to current risk assessment procedures.
BACKGROUND: Cytopathological examination serves as a tool for diagnosing solid
tumors and hematologic malignancies. Artificial intelligence (AI)-assisted
methods have been widely discussed in the literature for increasing sensitivity,
specificity and accuracy in the diagnosis of cytopathological clinical samples.
Many of these tools are also used in clinical practice. There is a growing body
of literature describing the role of AI in clinical settings, particularly in
improving diagnostic accuracy and providing predictive and prognostic insights.
METHODS: A comprehensive search for this systematic review was conducted using
databases Google, PUBMED (n = 450) and Google Scholar (n = 1067) with the
keywords "Artificial Intelligence" AND "cytopathological" and "fine needle
aspiration" AND "Deep Learning" AND "Machine Learning" AND "Hematologic
Disorders" AND "Lung Cancer" AND "Pap Smear" and "cervical cancer screening" AND
"Thyroid Cancer" AND "Breast Cancer" and "Sensitivity" and "Specificity". The
search focused on literature reviews and systematic reviews published in English
language between 2020 and 2024. PRISMA guidelines were adhered to with studies
included and excluded as depicted in a flowchart. 417 results were screened with
34 studies were chosen for this review.
RESULTS: In the screening of patients with cervical cancer, bone marrow and
peripheral blood smears and benign and malignant lesions in the lung,
AI-assisted methods, particularly machine learning and deep learning (a subset
of machine learning) methods, were applied to cytopathological data. These
methods yielded greater diagnostic accuracy, specificity and sensitivity and
decreased interobserver variability. Data sets were collected for both training
and validation. Human machine combined performance was also found to be
comparable to standalone performance in comparison with medical performance as
well.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of AI in the analysis of cytopathological samples in
research and clinical settings is increasing, and the involvement of
pathologists in AI workflows is becoming increasingly important.
BACKGROUND: The purpose of this study is to assess the feasibility of
mixed-reality (MixR) visualization for patient setup in breast and chest wall
radiotherapy (RT) by performing a first-in-human clinical trial comparing MixR
with a 3-point alignment.
METHODS: IRB approval was granted for a study incorporating MixR during the
setup process for patients undergoing proton (n = 10) or photon (n = 8) RT to
the breast or chest wall. For each patient, MixR was utilized for five fractions
and compared against another five fractions using 3-point alignment. During
fractions with MixR, the patient was aligned by at least one therapist wearing a
HoloLens 2 device who was able to guide the process by simultaneously and
directly viewing the patient and a hologram of the patient's surface derived
from their simulation CT scan. Alignment accuracy was quantified with cone-beam
CT (CBCT) for photon treatments and CBCT plus kV/kV imaging for proton
treatments. Registration time was tracked throughout the setup process as well
as the amount of image guidance (IGRT) utilized for final alignment.
RESULTS: In the proton cohort, the mean 3D shift was 0.96 cm using 3-point
alignment and 1.18 cm using MixR. An equivalence test indicated that the
difference in registration accuracy between the two techniques was less than
0.5 cm. In the photon cohort, the mean 3D shift was 1.18 cm using 3-point
alignment and 1.00 cm using MixR. An equivalence test indicated that the
difference in registration accuracy was less than 0.3 cm. Minor differences were
seen in registration time and the amount of IGRT utilization.
CONCLUSIONS: MixR for patient setup for breast cancer RT is possible at the
level of accuracy and efficiency provided by a 3-point alignment. Further
developments in marker tracking, feedback, and a better understanding of the
perceptual challenges of MixR are needed to achieve a similar level of accuracy
as provided by modern surface-guided radiotherapy (SGRT) systems.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov, UFHPTI 2015-BR05: Improving Breast
Radiotherapy Setup and Delivery Using Mixed-Reality Visualization, NCT05178927.
BACKGROUND: Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are a group of nanoscale cell-derived
membranous structures secreted by all cell types, containing molecular cargoes
involved in intercellular communication. EVs can be used to mimic "nature's
delivery system" to transport nucleic acids, peptides, lipids, and metabolites
to target recipient cells. EVs offer a range of advantages over traditional
synthetic carriers, thus paving the way for innovative drug delivery approaches
that can be used in different diseases, including cancer. Here, by using breast
cancer (BC) cells treated with the multi-kinase inhibitor sorafenib, we
generated EVs enriched in specific non-coding RNAs (miR-23b-3p, miR-126-3p, and
the long ncRNA GAS5) and investigated their potential impact on the aggressive
properties of the BC in vitro and in vivo using zebrafish.
METHODS: EVs were collected from 4 different BC cell lines (HCC1937, MDA-MB-231,
MCF-7, and MDA-MB-453) and characterized by western blotting, transmission
electron microscopy and nanoparticle tracking analysis. Levels of encapsulated
miR-23b-3p, miR-126-3p, and GAS5 were quantified by ddPCR. The role of the EVs
as carriers of ncRNAs in vivo was established by injecting MDA-MB-231 and
MDA-MB-453 cells into zebrafish embryos followed by EV-based treatment of the
xenografts with EVs rich in miR-23b-3p, miR-126-3p and GAS5.
RESULTS: ddPCR analysis revealed elevated levels of miR-23b-3p, miR-126-3p, and
GAS5, encapsulated in the EVs released by the aforementioned cell lines,
following sorafenib treatment. The use of EVs as carriers of these specific
ncRNAs in the treatment of BC cells resulted in a significant increase in the
expression levels of the three ncRNAs along with the inhibition of cellular
proliferation in vitro. In vivo experiments demonstrated a remarkable reduction
of xenograft tumor area, suppression of angiogenesis, and decreased number of
micrometastasis in the tails after administration of EVs enriched with these
ncRNAs.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrated that sorafenib-induced EVs, enriched with
specific tumor-suppressor ncRNAs, can effectively inhibit the aggressive BC
characteristics in vitro and in vivo. Our findings indicate an alternative way
to enrich EVs with specific tumor-suppressor ncRNAs by treating the cells with
an anticancer drug and support the development of new potential experimental
molecular approaches to target the aggressive properties of cancer cells.
BACKGROUND: The lesions observed in very old populations exhibit a wide spectrum
of characteristics. Histopathological evaluation may be necessary for accurate
diagnosis in this demographic. There is limited amount of data on the
histopathological evaluation of lesions in very old patients. Therefore, the aim
of this study was to assess the histopathological features in this population.
METHODS: A total of 5376 pathological samples from very old patients (≥ 80 years
old) were analyzed. Clinical and pathological data were retrospectively
reviewed. Histopathological diagnoses were categorized into three groups:
malignant (invasive) lesions (MLs), benign/inflammatory lesions (BLs), and
dysplastic-dysmorphic/non-invasive malignant lesions (DLs). Statistical analyses
were conducted on the histopathological data. Pearson's chi-square test and the
Fisher exact test were used to analyze the data, and statistical significance
was considered at a p-value of < 0.05.
RESULTS: The mean age of the patients was 83.6 ± 3.4 years (range: 80-107), with
53% being female. The upper gastrointestinal (GI) tract was the most common site
among all materials (28%, n = 1524). Benign/inflammatory lesions (BLs) accounted
for the highest proportion of cases (62%, n = 3322) compared to MLs and DLs. BLs
were significantly more prevalent in female patients (p < 0.001). MLs were
notably more common in biopsies from breast locations (p < 0.001). No patients
were diagnosed with DLs in the cytological materials.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite the broad spectrum of lesions observed in very old
patients, the majority tend to be benign. While the Coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) pandemic has altered healthcare dynamics, the increased frequency of
benign lesions among the very old population, as a result of more frequent
healthcare facility visits, is noteworthy. However, dysplastic and malignant
lesions remain significant in this population and can profoundly impact
patients' quality of life. This study contributes to our understanding of
histopathological diagnoses in the very old population, shedding light on the
current approach to managing their pathological specimens.
BACKGROUND: Inter- and intra-tumor heterogeneity is considered a significant
factor contributing to the development of endocrine resistance in breast cancer.
Recent advances in single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) and single-cell ATAC
sequencing (scATAC-seq) allow us to explore inter- and intra-tumor heterogeneity
at single-cell resolution. However, such integrated single-cell analysis has not
yet been demonstrated to characterize the transcriptome and chromatin
accessibility in breast cancer endocrine resistance.
METHODS: In this study, we conducted an integrated analysis combining scRNA-seq
and scATAC-seq on more than 80,000 breast tissue cells from two normal tissues
(NTs), three primary tumors (PTs), and three tamoxifen-treated recurrent tumors
(RTs). A variety of cell types among breast tumor tissues were identified, PT-
and RT-specific cancer cell states (CSs) were defined, and a
heterogeneity-guided core signature (HCS) was derived through such integrated
analysis. Functional experiments were performed to validate the oncogenic role
of BMP7, a key gene within the core signature.
RESULTS: We observed a striking level of cell-to-cell heterogeneity among six
tumor tissues and delineated the primary to recurrent tumor progression,
underscoring the significance of these single-cell level tumor cell clusters
classified from scRNA-seq data. We defined nine CSs, including five PT-specific,
three RT-specific, and one PT-RT-shared CSs, and identified distinct open
chromatin regions of CSs, as well as a HCS of 137 genes. In addition, we
predicted specific transcription factors (TFs) associated with the core
signature and novel biological/metabolism pathways that mediate the
communications between CSs and the tumor microenvironment (TME). We finally
demonstrated that BMP7 plays an oncogenic role in tamoxifen-resistant breast
cancer cells through modulating MAPK signaling pathways.
CONCLUSIONS: Our integrated single-cell analysis provides a comprehensive
understanding of the tumor heterogeneity in tamoxifen resistance. We envision
this integrated single-cell epigenomic and transcriptomic measure will become a
powerful approach to unravel how epigenetic factors and the tumor
microenvironment govern the development of tumor heterogeneity and to uncover
potential therapeutic targets that circumvent heterogeneity-related failures.
BACKGROUND: More than 60% of cancer survivors report unmet physical,
psychosocial, and informational needs. The care of cancer survivors includes
surveillance, health maintenance monitoring, referral for long-term adverse
effects of cancer treatment, and coordination of care. Group medical visits
(GMV) include medical care, education, and peer support and can be used to
facilitate the delivery of multidisciplinary survivorship care. We aimed to
characterize the current state of related research describing the role of GMV in
cancer survivorship care.
METHODS: For this scoping review, we searched for published literature using
PubMed, Embase, and other resources. We included intervention studies of
multidisciplinary care involving GMVs of adult patients with a history of cancer
requiring the presence of medical personnel, physicians, advanced practitioners,
or oncology nurses. We included studies that focused on broad cancer
survivorship care, rather than those using specific modalities, such as yoga, or
limited to specific aspects of cancer survivorship care, such as weight loss. We
characterized the studies by cancer type, structure of GMVs, and reported
outcomes.
RESULTS: We identified 2311 studies (2122 from PubMed and 189 from Embase). We
excluded 1524 duplicates and screened 787 studies for title and abstract review.
Finally, 63 studies were retrieved for full-text review, and six were included
in this scoping review. Of the included studies, four were non-randomized, and
two were randomized. Breast cancer was the most common site (4); other studies
included breast and other cancers (1) and hematopoietic transplant cancer
survivors (1). There was heterogeneity in the structure and frequency of
sessions and the survivorship domains addressed. The outcomes studied included
quality of life, healthcare utilization, and costs.
CONCLUSIONS: Limited high-quality research exists on the role of GMV in cancer
survivorship. Though shown to be effective in chronic disease, the evidence for
the effectiveness of this important and widely used approach in
multidisciplinary survivorship care remains inconsistent and preliminary; the
literature to date provides a starting point for larger-scale studies of GMV in
cancer survivorship care.
IMPLICATIONS FOR CANCER SURVIVORS: While Group medical visits are a promising
intervention to provide multidisciplinary care, larger studies are needed to
support their benefit in the care of cancer survivors.
BACKGROUND: Compared with children and older adults, the burden of cancer in
adolescents and young adults (ages 15-39) is understudied. We aimed to quantify
the global burden of adolescent and young adult cancer in 2022 and 2050, and
explore patterns in incidence, mortality, and case fatality.
METHODS: In this population-based study, we used the GLOBOCAN database to
quantify the number of new cases and cancer-related deaths, and corresponding
age-standardised incidence and mortality rates (ASRs; per 100 000 people aged
15-39 years), in adolescents and young adults. Estimates were quantified for all
cancers combined, excluding non-melanoma skin cancer, and 33 specific cancer
types. Case fatality was estimated using mortality-to-incidence ratios. Overall
and sex-specific estimates were calculated at the world, regional, human
development index (HDI), and income level. We estimated the future cancer burden
by applying the GLOBOCAN 2022 rates to sex-specific demographic projections for
the year 2050 using the UN World Population Prospects 2019 revision.
FINDINGS: An estimated 1 300 196 cases and 377 621 cancer-related deaths
occurred in adolescents and young adults in 2022. Incidence ASRs were 1·9-times
higher and mortality ASRs were 1·2-times higher in females than in males
(incidence ASR 52·9 vs 28·3; mortality ASR 13·1 vs 10·6). Although the incidence
ASR was highest in the high-income countries, the mortality ASR was highest in
the low-income countries; as a result, case fatality ranged from 12% in
high-income settings to 57% in low-income settings. Of the 33 cancer types
included in our analyses, breast or cervical cancer was the most frequently
diagnosed cancer and cause of cancer-related death in 163 and 93 countries,
respectively; incidence and mortality also varied the most by region for these
cancers. Finally, the adolescent and young adult cancer burden globally is
projected to increase by about 12% from 2022 to 2050, albeit with declines of
10·7% projected in very high HDI countries. The increase is expected to
overwhelmingly impact low HDI settings, where the burden of both cancer cases
and deaths is projected to double (a 102·3% increase).
INTERPRETATION: Although the adolescent and young adult cancer burden incidence
is highest in the most developed settings, transitioning countries have the
poorest outcomes and will face the greatest increases in burden by 2050. These
findings act as a reference to the global adolescent and young adult cancer
community to inform cancer control priorities and decrease global inequities.
FUNDING: None.
BACKGROUND: Percutaneous cryoablation (PCA), having shown effectiveness in
treating liver, lung, prostate, breast, and kidney tumors, is now gaining
attention for the treatment of soft tissue tumors. PCA functions by freezing
tissue, which induces ice crystal formation and cell death without damaging
collagen structures. Technical considerations include the selection and handling
of cryoprobes and cryogenic agents, procedural duration, and choice of image
guidance for precision. This review aims to synthesize the mechanisms,
applications, and technical aspects of PCA in the treatment of soft tissue
tumors.
METHODS: Adhering to PRISMA 2020 guidelines, a review was conducted of studies
published prior to March 2024 that investigated PCA of soft tissue tumors. The
review focused on technical and procedural aspects of cryoablation,
cryobiological principles, cellular and tissue responses to extreme cold, intra-
and post-procedure physiological mechanisms during and post-procedure, and main
clinical applications.
RESULTS: PCA is efficient in treating soft tissue tumors, including desmoid
tumors, vascular malformations, and abdominal wall endometriosis. Several
cryobiological mechanisms are involved, notably ice crystal formation, cellular
dehydration, osmotic effects, and the inflammatory response, all of which
contribute to its efficacy. Key technical aspects include the choice of
cryoprobes, cryogenic agents (argon gas or liquid nitrogen), and the duration
and control of freezing/thawing cycles. PCA also frequently outperformed
traditional treatments like surgery and radiotherapy in terms of pain reduction,
tumor size reduction, and patient outcomes. Moreover, its nerve sideration
properties make it effective under local anesthesia.
CONCLUSION: Demonstrating substantial pain reduction, tumor size decrease, and
high technical success rates, PCA offers a promising and minimally invasive
alternative for soft tissue tumor treatment.
CRITICAL RELEVANCE STATEMENT: Percutaneous cryoablation provides a minimally
invasive, precise alternative for soft tissue tumor management, advancing
clinical radiology by offering effective treatment with reduced patient risk and
enhanced outcomes through image-guided procedures.
KEY POINTS: Percutaneous cryoablation (PCA) offers a promising, minimally
invasive alternative for managing soft tissue tumors. PCA employs image-guided
techniques to accurately target and treat tumors, ensuring high precision and
control. PCA preserves structures like collagen, reduces pain, decreases tumor
size, and generally enhances patient outcomes.
BACKGROUND: The presence of a blurred area, depending on its localization, in a
mammogram can limit diagnostic accuracy. The goal of this study was to develop a
model for automatic detection of blur in diagnostically relevant locations in
digital mammography.
METHODS: A retrospective dataset consisting of 152 examinations acquired with
mammography machines from three different vendors was utilized. The blurred
areas were contoured by expert breast radiologists. Normalized Wiener spectra
(nWS) were extracted in a sliding window manner from each mammogram. These
spectra served as input for a convolutional neural network (CNN) generating the
probability of the spectra originating from a blurred region. The resulting blur
probability mask, upon thresholding, facilitated the classification of a
mammogram as either blurred or sharp. Ground truth for the test set was defined
by the consensus of two radiologists.
RESULTS: A significant correlation between the view (p < 0.001), as well as
between the laterality and the presence of blur (p = 0.004) was identified. The
developed model AUROC of 0.808 (95% confidence interval 0.794-0.821) aligned
with the consensus in 78% (67-83%) of mammograms classified as blurred. For
mammograms classified by consensus as sharp, the model achieved agreement in 75%
(67-83%) of them.
CONCLUSION: A model for blur detection was developed and assessed. The results
indicate that a robust approach to blur detection, based on feature extraction
in frequency space, tailored to radiologist expertise regarding clinical
relevance, could eliminate the subjectivity associated with the visual
assessment.
RELEVANCE STATEMENT: This blur detection model, if implemented in clinical
practice, could provide instantaneous feedback to technicians, allowing for
prompt mammogram retakes and ensuring that only high-quality mammograms are sent
for screening and diagnostic tasks.
KEY POINTS: Blurring in mammography limits radiologist interpretation and
diagnostic accuracy. This objective blur detection tool ensures image quality,
and reduces retakes and unnecessary exposures. Wiener spectrum analysis and CNN
enabled automated blur detection in mammography.
BACKGROUND: Phospholipid phosphatase 4 (PLPP4) has been identified as a
potential regulator of cancer cell dynamics, however, the role of PLPP4 in
breast cancer (BC) progression and the sensitivity of BC cells to doxorubicin
(DOX) remain elusive.
METHODS: The study analyzed the expression of PLPP4 and cell cycle-associated
protein 1 (CAPRIN1) expression in BC tissues and cells using quantitative
real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) and western
blotting assays. Functional assays including colony formation, EdU, Transwell,
and flow cytometry were employed to assess cellular behaviors. The sensitivity
of BC cells to DOX was analyzed by CCK-8 assay and an in vivo xenograft model
assay. The association between PLPP4 and CAPRIN1 was investigated using RNA
immunoprecipitation assay and dual-luciferase reporter assay.
RESULTS: Upregulation of PLPP4 expression was observed in BC tissues and cells.
Downregulation of PLPP4 expression in BC cells resulted in a suppression of
their proliferative capacity, as well as a reduction in migratory and invasive
capabilities. Additionally, this manipulation enhanced cell susceptibility to
apoptosis and improved the sensitivity of these cells to DOX. When PLPP4 was
knocked down in vivo in transplantable tumors, there was a marked enhancement in
the responsiveness to DOX treatment. The transcription factor CAPRIN1 was found
to regulate the expression of PLPP4 in the HCC1937 and MDA-MB-231 cell lines.
Upregulation of CAPRIN1 was observed in both BC tissues and cells, and
overexpression of PLPP4 reversed the effects of CAPRIN1 silencing on BC cell
proliferation, migration, invasion, apoptosis, and DOX sensitivity.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates that CAPRIN1 transcriptionally activates
PLPP4 to inhibit DOX sensitivity and promote BC progression. Targeting PLPP4 may
represent a novel therapeutic strategy to enhance the efficacy of DOX in BC
patients.
BACKGROUND: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is distinguished by a
significant likelihood of distant recurrence and an unfavourable prognosis.
However, the underlying molecules and mechanisms have not been fully elucidated.
METHODS: We investigated the expression profile and clinical relevance of
chaperonin-containing TCP1 subunit 6A (CCT6A) in TNBC. We performed cell
function assays on TNBC cells with CCT6A knockdown or overexpression. To further
explore the mechanism of action of CCT6A, RNA sequencing and
co-immunoprecipitation-mass spectrometry analyses were utilized. Rescue and
ubiquitination assays evaluated the impact of TRIM21-mediated CCT6A
ubiquitination and degradation on TNBC progression in vitro and in vivo.
Finally, we studied the potential of Ipatasertib, a pharmacological AKT
inhibitor, and/or anti-PD1 therapy in inhibiting TNBC progression.
RESULTS: Elevated CCT6A expression in TNBC patients was associated with an
adverse prognosis and lymph node metastasis. Mechanistically, CCT6A facilitated
cell migration, invasion, epithelial-mesenchymal transition and proliferation by
activating the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT pathway. The TRIM21 RING
domain is an E3 ligase, facilitating the K48-linked ubiquitination-mediated
degradation of CCT6A, thereby impeding TNBC progression. Moreover, in the tumour
tissues of the CCT6A-overexpressing mice, the quantity of CD8+ T cells and the
concentration of secreted interferon-gamma were decreased, whereas in the group
double-overexpression of CCT6A and TRIM21, they were elevated; the opposite was
observed in the knockdown and double-knockdown groups. Ipatasertib demonstrated
enhanced efficacy in inhibiting cell proliferation, invasion and migration in
TNBC cells ectopically expressing CCT6A. When Ipatasertib and anti-PD1 therapies
were combined, both the tumour volume and mass exhibited a notable reduction,
while the expression of CD45+CD8+ T cells increased, and that of CD45+CD4+CTLA4+
and CD45+CD4+PD1+ T cells decreased.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that TRIM21 inhibits TNBC progression by
facilitating the K48-linked ubiquitination-mediated degradation of CCT6A via the
PI3K/AKT signalling pathway. This highlights the potential of Ipatasertib and/or
anti-PD1 as therapeutic strategies, particularly for TNBC patients
overexpressing CCT6A.
KEY POINTS: Chaperonin TCP1 subunit 6A (CCT6A) plays an oncogenic role in
triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) through the AKT signaling pathway. TRIM21
facilitated K48-linked ubiquitination-mediated degradation of CCT6A, thereby
impeding TNBC progression. Our study collectively underscores the potential of
Ipatasertib in conjunction with anti-PD1 therapy as a promising strategy to
counteract CCT6A/AKT hyperactivity-driven TNBC progression.
ABSTRACT: Les myopathies centronucléaires sont des maladies congénitales rares,
caractérisées par une faiblesse musculaire et un positionnement anormal des
organites. Les principaux gènes associés à ces pathologies sont MTM1 (codant la
myotubularine 1), DNM2 (codant la dynamine 2), BIN1 (codant le bridging
integrator 1) et RYR1 (codant le récepteur à la ryanodine 1). À ce jour, aucun
traitement n’est approuvé. Cependant, le tamoxifène, une molécule déjà utilisée
en clinique dans le cancer du sein, a montré des effets positifs sur le
phénotype musculaire de modèles murins qui reproduisent trois des formes
principales de myopathies centronucléaires. Dans cet article, les effets du
tamoxifène sont comparés pour les différentes formes de ces pathologies.
BACKGROUND: Tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs), essential for the anti-tumor
response, are now recognized as promising and cost-effective biomarkers with
both prognostic and predictive value. They are crucial in the precision
treatment of breast cancer, particularly for predicting clinical outcomes and
identifying candidates for immunotherapy. This study aims to encapsulate the
current knowledge of TILs in breast cancer research while evaluating research
trends both qualitatively and quantitatively.
METHODS: Publications on TILs in breast cancer studies from January 1, 2004, to
December 31, 2023, were extracted from the Web of Science Core Collection.
Co-occurrence and collaboration analyses among countries/regions, institutions,
authors, and keywords were performed with Bibliometrix R packages and VOSviewer
software. CiteSpace was used for reference and keyword burst detection, while
high-frequency keyword layouts were generated using BICOMB. gCLUTO was employed
for biclustering analysis of the binary co-keyword matrix.
RESULTS: A total of 2,066 articles on TILs in breast cancer were identified.
Between 2004 and 2023, the USA and Milan University led productivity in terms of
country/region and institution, respectively. The journals "CANCERS," "Breast
Cancer Research and Treatment," and "Frontiers in Oncology" published the most
articles on this topic. Loi S was the leading author, with the highest number of
publications and co-citations. Co-keyword analysis revealed six research
hotspots related to TILs in breast cancer. The pathological assessment of TILs
using artificial intelligence (AI) remains in its early stages but is a key
focus. Burst detection of keywords indicated significant activity in "immune
cell infiltration", "immune checkpoint inhibitors", and "hormone receptor" over
the past three years.
CONCLUSION: This study reviews recent advancements and trends in TILs research
in breast cancer using scientometric analysis. The findings offer valuable
insights for funding decisions and developing innovative strategies in TILs
research, highlighting current research frontiers and trends.
BACKGROUND: Platelet-rich plasma (PRP) helps promote wound healing, but it is
unclear whether it stimulates breast cancer cell proliferation, which restricts
its application in breast cancer patients. This article explored the effect of
PRP on breast cancer cell proliferation through preclinical experiments.
METHOD: We cultivated MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells with PRP in vitro.
Subsequently, we employed Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) assays to assess their
proliferation ability, wound healing assays to evaluate their migration ability,
and Transwell assays to detect their invasion ability. Mouse breast cancer 4T1
cells were subcutaneously inoculated into nude mice. After tumor formation, PRP
was injected around each tumor. Tumor size was measured. After 15 days, the
tumors were surgically removed. Immunohistochemistry was used to detect key
proteins involved in proliferation and apoptosis.
RESULTS: PRP inhibited the proliferation, migration, and invasion of MDA-MB-231
in vitro. After PRP was injected around tumors in nude mice, tumor growth
slowed, Ki67 and phospho-histone H3 (pHH3) expression decreased, and Caspase 3
and Poly (adenosine diphosphate-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP1) expression
increased.
CONCLUSION: The PRP inhibits the proliferation of breast cancer MDA-MB-231 and
4T1 cells.
BACKGROUND: Cell death mechanisms are integral to the pathogenesis of breast
cancer (BC), with ATP-induced cell death (AICD) attracting increasing attention
due to its distinctive specificity and potential therapeutic applications.
METHODS: This study employed genomic methodologies to investigate the
correlation between drug sensitivity and types of AICD in BC. Initially, data
from TCGA were utilized to construct a prognostic model and classification
system for AICD. Subsequently, a series of bioinformatics analyses assessed the
prognostic and clinical significance of this model within the context of BC.
RESULTS: Analysis revealed a cohort of 18 genes associated with AICD, exhibiting
prognostic relevance. Survival analyses indicated that overall survival rates
were significantly lower in high-risk populations compared to their low-risk
counterparts. Furthermore, prognostic indicators linked to AICD demonstrated
high accuracy in predicting survival outcomes in BC. Immunological assessments
indicated heightened expression of anti-tumor infiltrating immune cells and
immune checkpoint molecules in low-risk populations, correlating with various
anti-tumor immune functions. Ultimately, a comprehensive prognostic model
related to AICD was developed through univariate analysis, least absolute
shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO), and multivariate Cox regression
analysis. As Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) concentration increased, the viability
of BC cells exhibited a general decline at each time point. Notably, ATP
diminished the mitochondrial membrane potential in BC cells while enhancing it
in normal breast epithelial cells. Additionally, ATP inhibited the migration of
BC cells and promoted their apoptosis. ATP also stimulated reactive oxygen
species (ROS) production in MCF-10A cells, with implications for the immune
response in BC cells. Compared to the control group, expression levels of CLIC6,
SLC1A1, and CEMIP were significantly reduced in the ATP intervention group,
whereas ANO6 expression was elevated. ANO6, CEMIP, and CLIC6 share genetic
variants with BC, while SLC1A1 does not exhibit genetic causal variation with
the disease.
CONCLUSION: A valuable prognostic model associated with AICD has been
established, capable of accurately predicting BC prognosis. The induction of
cell death by ATP appears to play a protective role in BC progression. These
findings carry significant implications for the implementation of personalized
and tailored treatment strategies for BC patients.
BACKGROUND: Family hardiness is a key variable contributing to positive family
functioning, which has significant effects on the quality of life and the mental
health of patientsand caregivers. The factors that contribute to family
hardiness support both the psychological and physical well-being of caregivers
is unknown. More specifically, the relationship of family hardiness with
attachment and caregiver preparedness has not been explored.
AIM: The current study aimed to investigate the family hardiness in caregivers
of breast cancer patients and explore the relationship with attachment and
caregiver preparedness and identify the associated factors.
METHODS: This cross-sectional correlational study was conducted from March to
July, 2022. 140 caregivers of breast cancer patients were recruited in two
IIIA-grade hospitals in Hunan Province using convenience sampling. Data were
collected using a personal characteristics questionnaire, The Family Hardiness
Index (FHI), Caregiver Preparedness Scale (CPS), and the Experiences in Close
Relationships Inventory-Revised Edition (ECR-R). Chi-square, Pearson's
correlation coefficient, generalized additive model and multiple logistic
regression analyses were performed.
RESULTS: A total of 140 caregivers participated in the study. The mean age of
participants was (42.29 ± 14.54) years and most of them were male (57.1%). The
mean FHI score of caregivers was 58.11 ± 5.67. Multiple linear regression
analysis indicated that family hardiness is affected by ECR-R, CPS, education
level, and knowledge of breast cancer. The score of CPS was positively
associated with family hardiness (β = 0.265, p < 0.001), whereas ECR-R
negatively predicted family hardiness (β = -0.078, p < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: Family hardiness plays a critical role in helping caregivers manage
the stresses associated with providing care to breast cancer patients. Enhancing
caregiver preparedness and education, as well as addressing attachment-related
issues, can significantly improve family hardiness. In light of our findings, we
suggest that closer relationships within families, adding preparedness and
knowledge of disease should be encouraged during the care of breast cancer
patients.